the potential for psychologists to assist the legal system has been recognized since the early twentieth century , but only within the past fifty years has psychology begun to realize this potential in meaningful ways . this progress has included newly developed professional organizations , such as the american psychology law society and the international association for correctional and forensic psychology ; graduate , internship , and fellowship programs in the specialty area ; organizations devoted to certifying qualified practitioners , such as the american board of forensic psychology and the american board of police and public safety psychology ; such scientific journals as law and human behavior , behavioral sciences and the law , and criminal justice and behavior ; and books devoted to the interface of psychology and law . this specialty area has continued to grow rapidly since the previous edition of the handbook of forensic psychology was published in two thousand and six , with increasing numbers of psychologists becoming involved in forensic practice and research and a steady flow of new ideas and information becoming available . chapters nineteen and twenty then provide accounts of the development of lie detection and hypnosis and describe current and emerging trends in forensic uses of these procedures . part five of the handbook looks at effective communication of expert opinion in forensic cases . chapter twenty one focuses on the essentials of writing appropriate and useful reports , and chapter twenty two discusses the admissibility of expert testimony and key considerations in communicating one work and opinions to legal decision makers . part six concludes the handbook with consideration of some important aspects of providing services to offenders . chapter twenty three discusses principles of effective correctional rehabilitation in both prison settings and the community , and chapter twenty four provides a behind-the-bars guide to conducting psychotherapy with offenders . chapter twenty five continues this theme with specific attention to diagnostic and treatment procedures useful in working with sexual offenders . finally , the appendix provides readers with the full text of the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology . we would like to thank our authors for their valuable contributions to this volume , both those who revised chapters that appeared in previous editions and those who joined us for the first time in this edition . we also want to acknowledge with appreciation the guidance and support of the john wiley and sons editorial staff , particularly patricia rossi , executive editor and kara borbely , editorial program coordinator . finally , we recognize and honor the contributions of our colleague allen hess , who served as coeditor of the first three editions before his untimely death . readers familiar with previous editions of the handbook will recognize his fingerprints on this edition as well . in the course of writing this chapter over four editions of this handbook , we have learned a few lessons . in the first edition , we asserted that psychologists do not care about the history of their profession but are instead drawn to contemporary issues and theories . we learned that this was a simplistic generalization , so in subsequent editions we acknowledged that our initial statement had been rash . psychologists do care about history , as is apparent from numerous articles published in professional journals reviewing historical trends , the continuing publication of a journal devoted to the history of psychology , and special interest divisions of professional organizations , such as division twenty six , society for the history of psychology , of the american psychological association . we have also learned that there is some danger in proclaiming an event or a person a historic first or a father , because these proclamations may be challenged , usually with kindness but not always with good humor . psychology , like other disciplines , needs historical insights . it needs to understand whence it came in order to assess where it is going . a perusal of journals and books published at the turn of the twentieth century , for example , may spark interest in a concept long forgotten or a predecessor whose theories and research deserve to be revisited . yet delving into early works reminds us of false starts and the occasional damage they did , such as the work of henry goddard on feeblemindedness during the early nineteeth and the self promotion of hugo munsterberg . however , we have also learned that hindsight is imperfect ; people are sometimes overlooked , and the historical discoveries may be incomplete . we thus approach this chapter once again with humility . to paraphrase the phrase that journalism is the first rough draft of history , we say here that this chapter is our fourth rough draft of the history of forensic psychology , with emphasis on its american origins . in these early years of the twenty first century , forensic psychology remains a young branch of applied psychology , having been recognized by the apa as a specialty in two thousand and one and recertified in two thousand and eight . even before that , in nineteen ninety one , specialty guidelines for forensic psychologists were adopted by the american psychology law society , which is division forty one of the apa . these guidelines were recently revised , renamed specialty guidelines for forensic psychology , and accepted by the apa council of representatives . interestingly , although forensic psychology was initially viewed as primarily clinical in nature such as by providing assessments to the courts its scope has broadened to encompass the practice of psychology as it provides expertise to the law in a very wide range of contexts . this broad view of forensic psychology was not always supported . according to ronald roesch , for example , most psychologists define the area more narrowly to refer to clinical psychologists who are engaged in clinical practice within the legal system . a few years later , brigham and grisso modified this somewhat , noting many psychologists define forensic psychology more narrowly to refer to clinical psychologists who are engaged in clinical practice within the legal system . the distinction here is between psychologists who bring scientific information to the courts for their consideration in cases and psychologists who evaluate individuals and testify about them in reference to a legal question . in recognizing forensic psychology as a specialty in two thousand and one , the apa itself adopted the narrow approach , to include the primarily clinical aspects of forensic assessment , treatment , and consultation . however , as noted , the specialty guidelines take a broader view . in this chapter , forensic psychology is being viewed broadly . it is both the research endeavor that examines aspects of human behavior directly related to the legal process and the professional practice of psychology within or in consultation with a legal system that encompasses both criminal and civil law and the numerous areas where they intersect . therefore , the term forensic psychology refers broadly to the production of psychological knowledge and its application to the civil and criminal justice systems . it includes activities as varied as these : courtroom testimony , child custody evaluations , law enforcement candidate screening , treatment of offenders in correctional facilities , assessment of plaintiffs with disability claims , research and theory building in the area of criminal behavior , and the design and implementation of intervention and prevention programs for youthful offenders . a review of the table of contents of this handbook indicates a similarly broad focus . in the pages to follow , after an introductory section covering seminal contributions , we review developments in four major areas of forensic psychology : legal psychology , correctional psychology , police psychology , and criminal psychology . readers will undoubtedly recognize that there is considerable overlap in these categories and in the subheadings . the jury , or at least the judge , should know how far errors in recollection are normal and how they vary under different conditions . but cattell himself was surprised at both the degree of inaccuracy he uncovered and the wide range of individual differences in the levels of confidence expressed by the students . answers to the weather question , for example , were equally distributed over all kinds of weather which are possible at the beginning of march . some students were nearly always sure they were correct , even when they were not , while others were consistently uncertain and hesitant in their answers , even when they were correct . cattell study probably was the genesis of modern forensic psychology in the united states , because it sparked the interest of other researchers in the psychology of testimony , which remains to this day a dominant research interest among legal psychologists . joseph jastrow immediately replicated cattell experiment at the university of wisconsin and obtained similar results . aside from this brief flirtation , however , american psychologists did not immediately embrace the study of legal issues . psychologists in europe seemed more intrigued they had long been interested in the psychological concepts involved . moreover , the researchers found that inaccuracies increased with respect to the second half of the scenario , when excitement and tension were at their peak . they concluded tentatively that affective reactions inhibit exact observation and reliable remembrance . by his own account , stern was more interested in basic research than its application . indeed , when i began in nineteen one to examine the correctness of recollection among my students , i was determined by theoretical interests in the realm of memory rather than by any practical considerations . yet once confronted with the results , i realized the importance of this research beyond the borders of mere academic psychology . throughout that first decade of the twentieth century , stern was an active researcher in the psychology of testimony . he also helped establish and edited the first journal on the psychology of testimony , betrage zur psychologie der aussage , which was published in leipzig . the journal was superseded in nineteen seven by the much broader zeitschrift fur angewande psychologie , edited by stern and his colleague otto lipmann . in a cautionary note about his research , stern stressed that most witnesses did not intentionally falsify their reports . rather , the subtle and common problem created was one of unintentional falsification : subjective sincerity does not guarantee objective truthfulness , he wrote . in his research , stern concluded among other things that : leading and suggestive questions contaminate the accuracy of eyewitness accounts of critical events ; there are important differences between adult and child witnesses ; lineups are of limited value when the members are not matched for age and physical appearance ; and interceding events between an initial event and its recall can have drastic effects on memory . therefore , modern forensic psychology began as legal psychology with empirical research on the psychology of testimony . wundt , a philosopher and an experimentalist , was wary of applying psychology until sufficient research had been conducted . he believed that the premature use of partial information could be disastrous . his students often took this caveat quite seriously , although some , like cattell , eventually began to link the laboratory to the world outside . munsterberg , always willing to give speeches , gave his inaugural lecture at radcliffe college in eighteen ninety four and his last at the same location in nineteen sixteen , when he suddenly died of a heart attack midsentence while lecturing his general psychology class . landy wrote that at the time of his death . munsterberg was an object of public scorn and was well on the way to professional ostracism . by nineteen nineteen , less than three years after his death , there was hardly any reference to any of his more than ten books and dozens of articles in basic and applied psychology . benjamin noted that munsterberg was one of the most despised individuals in america . interestingly , in a recent article , sporer correctly pointed out that much valuable information about early contributions of other individuals in legal psychology has been lost because of excessive focus on munsterberg . bornstein and penrod admirably compared the value of these respective texts , noting that arnold , even though he was not an academician , displayed an impressive familiarity with the psychological literature of the day . they noted also that his style was dry and reads like the serious academic tome that it is , whereas munsterberg style was directed at a general , less serious audience . bornstein and penrod are to be commended for bringing attention to this obscure work , but the fact remains that arnold overall contributions were not as far reaching as those of munsterberg . the following year , he became a research assistant . in nineteen twenty nine , he was appointed associate professor , teaching a course in the psychology of evidence , which appears to qualify him as the first psychologist granted faculty status in an american law school . in nineteen thirty , slesinger followed hutchins to the university of chicago , where he served as professor of law and , briefly , as dean of the law school . several years earlier , psychologist william marston had been the first to receive a faculty appointment as professor of legal psychology when he joined the faculty at american university in nineteen twenty two . marston was by far the most influential psychologist associated with the legal system during this era . he was a student of munsterberg but did not have his mentor penchant for alienating the legal community and much of the american public . it is likely , therefore , that marston along with lewis terman and psychologists associated with the new york city psychopathic clinic qualifies as one of the first psychological consultants to the criminal justice system in the united states . marston also conducted the first serious research on the jury system . using subjects in simulated jury conditions , he found in a series of studies that written evidence was superior to oral evidence ; free narration , though less complete , was more accurate than crossexamination or direct questioning ; a witness caution in answering was a good indicator of accuracy ; and female jurors considered evidence more carefully than male jurors . however , it rejected his testimony , based on psychological test data , that a twelveyearold alleged victim of an attempted rape was a moron and could not be presumptively believed . in agreeing with the trial court , the west virginia supreme court noted , it is yet to be demonstrated that psychological and medical tests are practical , and will detect the lie on the witness stand . although some commentators interpreted driver as a major loss for psychologists wishing to achieve status as expert witnesses , louisell noted that the decision was not a rejection of psychologists per se , only of the particular evidence offered by one psychologist . nevertheless , it was not until much later , in the nineteen forties and nineteen fifties , that psychologists testified in courts of law on a regular basis , at least in some jurisdictions . they offered opinions and presented data relevant to subjects as diverse as the influence of pretrial publicity on potential witnesses and juries , the effects of pornography on adolescents , the effect of certain educational practices on children , and the likely influence of advertisements on consumers . this is not to say that there was widespread acceptance of the idea that psychologists deserved a niche in the courtroom . resistance to the idea , or at best a cautious approach , consistently characterized much of the legal literature . in the early nineteen forties and the post world war two era , appellate courts also began to hand down rulings that allowed psychologists to offer expert testimony in trial courts on the issue of mental responsibility for criminal and tortious conduct . loh attributed this eventual acceptance to an increase in professionalization , the rapid growth of mental health professions during this period , and the formulation of legal doctrines of insanity consistent with modern psychiatry . one important decision , perhaps the first influential decision , was people hawthorne , a michigan case . hawthorne had been tried for the murder of his wife lover and had pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity . the trial court refused to qualify as an expert witness a professor of psychology from michigan state normal college who had a doctoral degree and an impressive list of credentials . in finding that the trial court had erred in not accepting the psychologist as an expert , the michigan supreme court ruled that the standard for determining expert status was not a medical degree but the extent of the witness knowledge . it advised trial courts to evaluate carefully the merits of a potential witness claim to expertise , noting that a psychologist ability to detect insanity could not be presumed inferior to that of a medical man . the dissenters , however , believed that insanity is a disease and therefore only a person with medical training should qualify as an expert . later in hidden mutual life insurance co . the fourth circuit court of appeals allowed psychological expertise to be applied to a civil case relating to mental status . the plaintiff argued that a disabling nervous condition prevented him from engaging in any gainful occupation and entitled him to disability benefits . a clinical psychologist with a doctoral degree administered a battery of projective tests and testified on his behalf . not only did he report on the test results , but he also gave the opinion that the plaintiff deserved the benefits . when the lawyer for the insurance company objected , the trial judge instructed the jury to disregard the entire opinion testimony on the grounds that the psychologist did not qualify as an expert . the circuit court of appeals ruled that the psychologist should have been qualified as an expert to express his opinion about the plaintiff mental condition . while some psychologists were struggling to be accepted as experts on questions of mental status , competence , and criminal responsibility , others during this era were joining the crucial legal battle against school segregation by testifying and consulting with attorneys in the state cases that would ultimately culminate in the nineteen fifty four landmark ruling brown board of education . david krech and helen trager , social psychologists who had published articles on racial attitude tests , and horace english , an expert on child psychology , were among many who testified for the plaintiffs at some of the school segregation trials . psychologist henry garrett , a former president of the apa , testified on behalf of the state . perhaps the most widely publicized and since then highly critiqued contribution on behalf of the plaintiffs was that of kenneth clark and mamie clark , who conducted the nowfamous doll research to gauge the effects of segregation . kenneth clark then gave social framework testimony reporting the results of this research . when the national association for the advancement of colored people appealed brown and three other segregation cases to the us supreme court , kenneth clark , isidor chein , and stuart w . cook wrote the social science statement that included signatures of thirty two eminent social scientists . this was not , however , the first social science brief to be submitted to an appellate court . according to brigham and grisso , that distinction belongs to the brief submitted to the oregon supreme court in muller oregon . in that case , louis brandeis who later became a prominent justice of the us supreme court argued in support of the state that work hours of women should be limited because social science data demonstrated their inherent weakness . history has not been kind to the scientists in either case . brandeis patriarchal argument in the muller case would be deplored and roundly denounced today , both for its tenor and for its lack of empirical support and rigor . social scientists in the brown case were criticized for their naive methodology , lack of objectivity , and faulty conclusions based on insufficient scientific evidence . in his historiographical inquiry , however , jackson noted that the doll experiments were but one prong of many studies that psychologists and other social scientists referenced in their trial testimony and in the brief submitted to the supreme court . he also argued convincingly that critiques of these social scientists reflected a misreading of their testimony , their research , and their evaluation of relevant evidence . during the same era , psychologists were continuing to make enough inroads testifying on the issue of criminal responsibility that psychiatrists felt the need to protect their turf . in nineteen fifty four , the council of the american psychiatric association , the executive council of the american psychoanalytical association , and the american medical association joined in a resolution stating that only physicians were legitimate experts in the field of mental illness for purposes of courtroom testimony . other individuals could participate only if their testimony was coordinated by medical authority . the resolution greatly influenced trial courts , which became reluctant to accept independent psychological testimony . finally , in jenkins united states , the court of appeals for the district of columbia gave its own direct , although conditional , support to the use of psychologists as experts on the issue of mental illness . although the court was sharply divided , its decision remains the predominant authority for the use of psychologists in the area of criminal responsibility . following that opinion , federal courts and increasingly more state courts certified psychologists as expert witnesses in both criminal and civil cases . during the years in which munsterberg was proselytizing about psychology usefulness in the courtroom , particularly involving expert testimony , another american psychologist was more quietly making inroads into a different forensic area , one specifically related to juvenile courts . as we noted earlier , consultation with these courts was common , but it was chiefly in the area of assessment . in nineteen nine , clinical psychologist grace m . fernald worked with psychiatrist william healy to establish the first clinic designed for youthful offenders , the juvenile psychopathic institute . it was initially developed to serve the newly established juvenile court of chicago by offering diagnoses of problem children . fernald , who received her doctorate from the university of chicago in nineteen seven , was probably the first clinical psychologist to work under the supervision of a psychiatrist as well as one of the earliest psychologists to specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of children and adolescents who appeared before the juvenile courts . the institute , which extended its services rapidly to include treatment and research as well as diagnosis , became a public agency in nineteen fourteen , the institute for juvenile research . arguably , it also provided the earliest formal internships in forensic psychology in the country . fernald and healy used the relatively new stanfordbinet intelligence scale to assess delinquents , but they soon realized the importance of obtaining performance measures as well . this prompted them to develop the healyfernald series of twenty three performance tests , which they began using in nineteen eleven . the two eventually went their separate ways . fernald became a specialist in intellectual disability and intelligence and testing and taught psychology at the university of california los angeles for twenty seven years , until her retirement in nineteen forty eight . healy , along with psychologist augusta bronner , went on to establish the judge baker clinic in boston in nineteen seventeen . during the first third of the twentieth century , most psychologists providing regular services to the courts were psychometrists associated with clinics . the term forensic psychology had not been minted , and legal psychologists were in the halls of academe or consulting sporadically with judges and lawyers . thus , it seems that much of the forensic work of psychologists during this period consisted of cognitive and personality assessments of individuals , both juveniles and adults , who were to come before the courts . the drudgery of daytoday testing made applied psychology unappealing as a profession . his followers consulted with the juvenile courts and dutifully administered these tests to the children of the poor who arrived at their door . goddard warning that feebleminded individuals should not be allowed to roam about freely in society because of their innate proclivity toward antisocial behavior contributed significantly to the incarceration of individuals during their reproductive periods and the sterilization of residents in both juvenile and adult facilities . an article in volume one of the american psychologist carried the following job description for a court psychologist . interviews offenders referred by the court to determine the causes of the crime , the attitudes and conflicts , and the educational , vocational , and social background of the client . also may interview parents and guardians . administers and interprets individual intelligence , performance , and personality tests including projective techniques . writes complete case histories including interview information and test interpretations . presents case histories and recommended treatment to colleagues including medical and other officers of the court . may testify in court . qualifications include ma in psychology with a phd preferred , relevant course work , previous experience , and emotional maturity . interestingly , shartle noted that , although few psychologists were employed in such positions , there was indication that employment in the field would increase . however , higher positions in the court were not usually open to psychologists . lindner pinpointed nineteen thirteen as the date when psychological services were first offered in a us correctional facility , specifically a women reformatory in the state of new york . watkins identified the psychologist as eleanor rowland , who was asked to devise a test battery to identify offenders who would benefit from educational programs and be safely returned to society . however , the main function of psychologists employed in some capacity in the state and federal correctional systems during these years was apparently the detection of feeblemindedness among offenders , a condition thought to lead to a life of crime . again , the work of goddard and his followers is relevant . concurrently , however , some psychologists like rowland became involved in a different endeavor : the classification of inmates into various groups for determining where they were to be placed and what services might be provided . the first prison classification system developed by psychologists was apparently instituted in new jersey in nineteen eighteen . new jersey also became the first state to hire a fulltime correctional psychologist . the first state in the united states to provide comprehensive psychological examinations of all admissions to its prison system and applications for parole was wisconsin , in nineteen twenty four . in the late nineteen thirties , darley and berdie surveyed thirteen federal and one hundred and twenty three state prisons and learned that they employed a total of sixty four psychologists who called themselves prison psychologists . although all considered themselves clinical psychologists , only about half had doctorates in psychology . later , raymond corsini expressed concern that there was as yet no history of prison psychology . he estimated that during the nineteen forties , there were approximately two hundred individuals confined in us correctional facilities who were served by a mere eighty psychologists . their work consisted of testing ; providing educational , vocational , and personal guidance ; and maintaining working relationships with all members of the prison staff . in one of the most comprehensive surveys undertaken during the early nineteen forties , questionnaires were sent to four psychologists in an effort to discover the nature of the profession . of the three questionnaires returned in nineteen forty , seventy six men and twenty women indicated they were employed as fulltime psychologists in prisons or correctional institutions . of the three questionnaires returned by the same group in nineteen forty four , fifty three men and twenty seven women said they were employed in prisons or correctional institutions . although these data support corsini estimation that between eighty and one hundred psychologists were employed in the nation correctional facilities during the early to mid nineteen forties , it is interesting to note that , by the mid nineteen forties , approximately onethird of prison psychologists were women . participates in research . investigates problems of penal psychology or test construction and prepares reports of finding . again it was noted that opportunities in the field were limited and the number of openings not numerous . however , several states were planning postwar expansion in buildings and services . psychologists entered the canadian correctional system much later , perhaps as late as the early nineteen fifties . watkins notes that canadian correctional psychology made its first appearance in the literature in nineteen fifty two in a series of newsletters published by the ontario psychological association . the newsletters focused on psychology in the ontario provincial corrections programs and the federal correctional service . the first correctional psychologist in the federal system in canada was employed in nineteen fifty five at st . vincent de paul penitentiary in quebec . correctional psychologists in canada were at first employed primarily to classify inmates for security placement and were usually not a component of the mental health treatment afforded to inmates . in the united states , their role appears to have been broader . since these early days , however , canada in many ways has outpaced american corrections particularly state prison systems both in developing risk assessment instruments and providing rehabilitation services to inmates . classification , however , has always been an important enterprise for psychologists working in correctional settings . reliable offender classification was both an important service to offer to correctional administrators and in many respects a prerequisite to effective treatment . in both the united states and canada , from the twentyd20th century on , psychologists became increasingly involved in developing and testing more sophisticated classification systems . one of the earliest of these modern systems was the jesness classification system . best known , however , was the system proposed by edwin megargee and based on the minnesota multiphasic personality inventory . megargee , using his research on overcontrolled and undercontrolled personalities as a springboard , identified ten inmate types . prison officials then made use of these groupings to assign inmates to custody levels , job assignments , and rehabilitation programs . megargee system is still in use in some prison systems , and clements observed that megargee deserves much credit for providing correctional psychologists with an excellent list of seven criteria for a good classification system . in the nineteen sixties and early nineteen seventies , correctional psychology as a subdiscipline of forensic psychology began to expand . even to this day , though , many if not most psychologists working in corrections prefer to be called correctional psychologists rather than forensic psychologists . this may be because they see their primary function as one of providing services to inmates , not to the legal system . some units those in which more intensive treatment services could be provided became therapeutic communities . other units provided education , training , or work experiences , together with some counseling . although unit management lost support in the united states during the punitive nineteen eighties and nineteen nineties , the concept survives in some state and federal facilities , particularly where substance abuse treatment is provided . many correctional psychologists worked in the trenches during the nineteen sixties and early nineteen seventies and made significant contributions . stanley brodsky was instrumental in launching modern correctional psychology in the united states , but many other individuals made significant contributions as well . canada has its own group of pioneers who have had great impact on correctional philosophy and practice on an international level . they include psychologists paul gendreau , karl hanson , don andrews , and many others whose work is cited in the excellent historical reviews and summaries of watkins and wormith and luong . in the united states , brodsky term as president of the american association for correctional psychology helped provide the impetus to move correctional psychology into a recognized and viable profession . during nineteen seventy two and nineteen seventy three , with brodsky at the helm , the aacp played a key role in setting up a series of conferences on psychology in the criminal justice system , with emphasis on corrections . the proceedings were published in a volume edited by brodsky , psychologists in the criminal justice system . the publication of this influential book could arguably be the official launch date of modern correctional psychology , even though the aacp itself predated brodsky book . brodsky also became the founding editor of the international journal criminal justice and behavior , launched in nineteen seventy four and sponsored by the aacp . brodsky leadership and enthusiasm also helped build one of the earliest doctoral programs specifically designed to prepare clinical psychologists to work in the criminal justice system , particularly corrections , at the university of alabama . in the late nineteen seventies , the apa approved a clinical internship in corrections at the wisconsin department of corrections . today , such programs exist in a variety of colleges and universities , many of which provide internship opportunities for students in state prisons as well as the federal bureau of prisons . those who prefer a narrow definition of forensic psychology do not typically include police psychology in its purview . we have done so because police are sworn to uphold the law and are in many cases the gatekeepers to entry into criminal and juvenile courts , if not civil courts . thus , psychologists who consult with police in numerous capacities are connected with the legal system . it is difficult to pinpoint precisely when police psychology began , primarily because individual psychologists have provided a variety of services to law enforcement without their work being formally recognized . viteles noted that police departments in germany used psychologists in a variety of capacities as early as nineteen nineteen . in the united states , in keeping with the psychometric movement of the early twentieth century , contributions centered around assessment , particularly cognitive assessment administered to candidates for law enforcement positions . four discernible but overlapping historical trends in american police psychology can be identified : cognitive and aptitude screening , personality assessment and the search for the police personality , stress management and other clinical services , and fairness in screening and selection . the first trend nineteen sixteen to nineteen sixty is characterized by attempts of psychologists to assess the intellectual skills required to be an effective police officer . the second trend nineteen fifty two to nineteen seventy five focused on the development of personality measures capable of distinguishing effective from less effective officers . during the second trend , there also were many unsuccessful attempts to identify a police personality . the third trend nineteen seventy four to nineteen ninety four was characterized by psychologists becoming increasingly involved in the identification and treatment of stress and other emotional reactions often experienced by police officers and their loved ones . such topics of interest included the use of excessive force , police decision making , postshooting traumatic reaction , fitness for duty evaluations , and police suicide . the fourth trend nineteen eighty to the present refers to the legal requirements that all persons should have an equal chance of being selected on the basis of individual merit and qualifications . topics during this trend include the americans with disabilities act of nineteen ninety , gender issues in policing , and minority composition, ethnic composition, racial composition of law enforcement agencies . because this chapter focuses on early history , we briefly sketch only the first two trends . it should be noted , however , that police psychologists today are actively involved in consultation with law enforcement and with research in a variety of areas that reflect and transcend the above trends . many belong to professional organizations , such as the apa division eighteen , psychologists in public service and its subgroup police and public safety . lewis terman was the first american psychologist to use mental tests as screening devices in the selection of law enforcement personnel . on october thirty one , nineteen sixteen , at the request of the city manager of san jose , california , he administered an abbreviated form of the stanfordbinet to thirty police and fire department applicants . they ranged in age from twenty one to thirty eight , with a median age of thirty . only four had attended high school , and none had attended beyond the sophomore year . terman found that most of the applicants functioned near the dullnormal range of intelligence ; only three obtained an iq over one hundred , the score considered average for the general population . based on his experience with the intellectual capabilities of schoolage children , terman suggested , somewhat arbitrarily , that applicants with an iq under eighty were not fit for police work or firefighting . the city manager agreed , and ten applicants were immediately excluded from further consideration . the differences between her findings and those of terman and thurstone were probably due to department leadership factors , recruitment procedures , and selection ratios . intelligence testing continued throughout much of the middle part of the twentieth century and may still exist in some departments today . however , questions about the validity of such assessment and understandable resistance from police unions persuaded most agencies to turn to a different form of assessment , the personality assessment . wilmington , delaware , and toledo , ohio , appear to share the distinction of being the first two cities to require ongoing psychological screening for use in police selection , in the form of mental and personality tests . the year was nineteen thirty eight . thus , personality tests came on the scene at about this time . it was not until the late nineteen fifties and nineteen sixties , though , that personality assessment overtook cognitive tests in the screening of law enforcement personnel . while the aforementioned psychologists were among the first to study the cognitive capacities of police officers and candidates , there is no indication that they consistently participated in the screening and selection of law enforcement personnel . at this point , we have no information about who might have been the first psychologist to assume this regular role . as late as nineteen thirty nine , donald paterson could identify only one psychologist , rourke who had actively investigated the validity of the nation civil service examination system , even though routine competitive exams were administered as far back as eighteen eighty three . during the late nineteen forties and the nineteen fifties , psychologists continued to consult with police departments . the psychological screening processes initiated by the wilmington and toledo police departments was adopted by other cities ; jacksonville in nineteen forty seven , berkeley in nineteen forty nine , oakland in nineteen fifty , new orleans in nineteen fifty two , and pasadena , philadelphia , milwaukee , and cleveland in nineteen fifty three . in june nineteen fifty two , the los angeles police department began to administer a battery of psychological tests . the nineteen fifty seven rankin article was the first to appear in the literature attesting to any ongoing program of psychological assessment for police applicants . during the late nineteen sixties , personality assessment , psychological screening , and police psychology in general received an immense boost when the president commission on law enforcement and the administration of justice strongly recommended widespread use of psychological measures to determine the emotional stability of all officer candidates . this recommendation was followed by the strong endorsement in nineteen sixty eight by the national advisory commission on civil disorder that psychological screening would improve the emotional quality of individuals entering law enforcement . in keeping with commission recommendations , congress provided law enforcement assistance administration funds for law enforcement agencies to retain the services of mental health professionals . in nineteen seventy three , the police task force report of the national commission on criminal justice standards and goals encouraged the establishment of a behavioral sciences unit or consultant for all law enforcement agencies . even before then , though , psychologists were offering services to law enforcement on an asneeded basis , consulting in such areas as stress management , crisis management with the mentally disordered , and domestic violence . according to nietzel , the first project to train police in crisis intervention techniques in domestic disputes was developed in the late nineteen sixties by morton bard , consulting with the new york city police department . at about the same time , in december nineteen sixty eight , martin reiser was hired by the los angeles police department as a fulltime police psychologist . the evidence to date indicates that reiser was the first fulltime psychologist whose responsibilities were strictly police related . reiser himself is not entirely certain he was the first fulltime police psychologist in the country . in nineteen sixty nine , he presented a paper at the western psychological association convention in vancouver entitled the police department psychologist . this presentation may represent the official launch of contemporary north american police psychology . the paper was published in nineteen seventy two . reiser continued to be the most prolific writer on police psychology during the early nineteen seventies . in nineteen seventy two , in cooperation with the california school of professional psychology and the los angeles police department , he helped establish what is believed to be the first clinical internship in police psychology in the united states . by nineteen seventy seven , at least six other law enforcement agencies employed fulltime psychologists . in the early years of the twentieth century , psychologists began to offer psychological perspectives on criminal behavior and to speculate about the causes of crime . like the police psychology discussed earlier , criminal psychology typically is not considered in the narrow definitions of forensic psychology , primarily because it appears more theoretical than clinical in nature . however , in its youth , criminal psychology was essentially clinical in nature , as the theories often centered on the measurable mental capacities of offenders . furthermore , forensic psychology devoid of a theoretical base such as that provided by criminal psychology is difficult to justify and support . psychologists like goddard had repeatedly found that most juvenile and adult offenders were mentally deficient , which led to the conclusion that a primary cause of crime and delinquency was intellectual limitation . in large part , this belief reflected the pervasive influence of darwinism , which contended that humans differ only in degree from their animal brethren . the mentally deficient were considered both intellectually and morally less capable of adapting to modern society . they presumably resorted to more primitive ways of meeting their needs , such as crime . these unfortunate conclusions , which did not take into account social conditions , cultural differences , or socialization processes , lent support to unconscionable practices such as lengthy incarceration of the disadvantaged , confused , and powerless . in the history of psychology , few scholars have ventured to offer comprehensive theories on crime or delinquent behavior . those who have have often been strongly influenced by darwinian thinking . therefore , theoretical orientations focusing on mental deficiency or biological and constitutional dispositions dominated early psychological criminology . in the early nineteen sixties , a psychological criminology distinct from psychiatric and more extensive than psychometrics began to show signs of life . hans toch , who was also making significant contributions to correctional psychology , edited one of the first books on psychological criminology , legal and criminal psychology . some may argue that hans gross published the first criminal psychology book in eighteen ninety seven , the same year in which he was appointed professor in ordinary for criminal law and justice administration at the university of czernowitz in austria . one writer has asserted that gross was the originator of the discipline of criminal psychology . however , gross was a lawyer by training , in practice , and in spirit and eventually became a successful judge . his book details his observations of offenders , witnesses , jurors , and judges but relies very little on psychological research . this is not surprising , of course , because psychology in eighteen ninety seven was far from being an integrated discipline with a rich body of knowledge . nevertheless , it is significant that toch book , published more than sixty years later , represents the earliest attempt to integrate , in an interdisciplinary fashion , the empirical research of psychologists relevant to criminal behavior and legal issues . british psychologist hans eysenck , in crime and personality , formulated the first comprehensive theoretical statement on criminal behavior advanced by a psychologist . eysenck theory focused on the personality characteristics of extraversion and introversion , which he believed could be attributed to both a biological predisposition to seek or avoid sensation and the learning experiences obtained in one social environment . although eysenck theory was circulated and tested extensively in the late nineteen sixties and nineteen seventies , it has been shifted aside today , replaced by popular developmental approaches . shortly after eysenck proposed his theory , edwin megargee put forth his own heuristic statements regarding undercontrolled and overcontrolled personalities and their relationships to violence , a theory that then served as a basis for his classification system referred to earlier . toch followed with violent men . the relationship between aggression and violence was studied seriously under the leadership of leonard berkowitz , albert bandura and later robert baron . following psychiatrist hervey cleckley groundbreaking work on psychopaths , they became subjects of vigorous theory building and research in the hands of canadian psychologist robert hare and others . psychopathy continues to be a rich research area on the etiology of criminal behavior to this day . since the nineteen seventies , we have witnessed a literature and research explosion in all areas of forensic psychology . some thirty years ago , loh observed that forensic psychology had come of age . most recently , heilbrun and brooks noted that he field has matured : the recognition of the importance of the foundational science is stronger , and we are closer to identifying best practices across a range of legal contexts that are addressed by forensic psychology research and practice . in nineteen sixty five , just over one hundred english language articles and books related to forensic psychology had been published . by the mid nineteen seventies , the numbers were well into the thousands . professional journals exclusively devoted to forensic psychological research and issues were beginning to emerge in north america . criminal justice and behavior led the way in nineteen seventy four , followed by law and psychology review beginning in nineteen seventy five , law and human behavior in nineteen seventy seven , behavioral sciences and the law in nineteen eighty two , and psychology , public policy , and law in nineteen ninety five . great britain followed suit with criminal behavior and mental health , psychology , crime , and law , the british psychological society legal and criminological psychology , and the journal of forensic psychology practice . in addition to these , other interdisciplinary scholarly and scientific journals relevant to forensic psychology have emerged in recent years . during the nineteen seventies , interdisciplinary and specialized training in forensic psychology was introduced at the doctoral , master , internship , postdoctoral and continuing education levels . the first interdisciplinary , successful psychology and law program was developed by bruce sales at the university of nebraska lincoln in nineteen seventy four . other universities soon followed in this endeavor , some more successfully than others . in the late twentieth century and into twenty first , thoughtful articles addressing the content of education and training programs in forensic psychology have been published . another indication of the growth in forensic psychology is professional certification of practitioners in the field , a development that began in the late nineteen seventies . beginning in nineteen seventy eight , board certification in forensic psychology was provided by the american board of forensic psychology . defining forensic psychology . there is no consensual definition of forensic psychology . perhaps it is surprising , given the relatively long history and growth of forensic psychology over the past forty years , that there is no uniform or consensual definition for this specialty area , and most differences involve how narrowly or broadly the field is defined . definitions range from expansive ones that include any application of psychology to any legal matters to those that are narrower and typically are limited to clinical and counseling psychologists involvement in legal matters as examiners , treatment providers , or consultants . examples of more expansive definitions include those offered by huss , who defined forensic psychology as any application of psychology to the legal system ; the american psychological association , which in its specialty guidelines for forensic psychology indicated that forensic psychology refers to professional practice by any psychologist working within any subdiscipline of psychology when applying the scientific , technical , or specialized knowledge of psychology to the law to assist in addressing legal , contractual , and administrative matters ; and the american board of forensic psychology , which described forensic psychology as the application of the science and profession of psychology to questions and issues relating to law and the legal system . in contrast , in its petition to the apa committee for the recognition of specialties and proficiencies in professional psychology to establish forensic psychology as a psychological specialty , the forensic specialty council offered a more narrow definition : forensic psychology is the professional practice by psychologists within the areas of clinical psychology , counseling psychology , school psychology or another specialty recognized by the american psychological association , when they are engaged as experts and represent themselves as such , in an activity primarily intended to provide professional psychological expertise to the judicial system . brigham observed that these differences are more than semantic , and the varying definitions have distinct advantages and disadvantages . whereas adopting a broad definition , according to brigham , could promote growth and coherence in the field and facilitate development of graduate training programs , he acknowledged that grouping clinical psychologists with nonclinicians could prove complicated and perhaps problematic given the very different training and licensure requirements that often apply . adding to the confusion , how the terms forensic psychology or psychology and law are defined differs internationally . conventionally , the entire field including both clinical or applied areas and research areas has been referred to as psychology and law or law and psychology in north america and continental europe , whereas the term forensic psychology has been more commonly employed in the united kingdom , australia and new zealand . to this end , forensic psychologists work at the interface of psychology and the law . as forensic psychologists work with legal actors , including attorneys , judges , and others in the justice system , a number of tensions exist . although commentators have characterized these tensions differently , a number of common themes emerge . drawing on the framework provided by haney , we present eight differences between psychology and law that may contribute to tensions between the disciplines . the emphasis in law is stare decisis , whereas in psychology the emphasis is on creativity . law is hierarchical whereas psychology is empirical . decisions within the legal system are hierarchically based and authoritative , with lower courts bound by the decisions of higher courts . in psychology , however , it is the accumulation of a body of consistent and supporting data that confirms the validity of a particular position or claim , not its authoritative declaration . although this is not to say that bias does not enter into the research process , the goal of the psychologist is to attain an objective understanding of the phenomena rather than victory over a particular viewpoint . law is prescriptive , whereas psychology is descriptive . the law is primarily prescriptive , telling people how they should behave , whereas psychology is essentially a descriptive discipline , seeking to describe behavior as it actually occurs . this dimension captures a difference in the values espoused in the disciplines , with law outlining how one ought to behave and psychology adopting a more nonjudgmental orientation of how people do behave . decision making in law is based on the appearance of certainty , whereas decision making in psychology is based on probabilistic evidence . the decisions made in the law typically take on a dichotomous , all or nothing quality the accused in a criminal trial is deemed either guilty or not guilty , the defendant in a civil case is found liable or not liable . psychologists , in contrast , operate in terms of probabilities ; for example , claims are asserted on the basis of evidence associated with a probability level . as a result , conclusions drawn by psychologists typically are qualified and not categorical by nature . psychologists assisting the legal system . psychologists assist the legal system in a number of ways including providing expert testimony in legal , administrative , and legislative proceedings ; conducting and testifying about research conducted in anticipation of litigation ; testifying about research not conducted in connection with litigation but that is nonetheless relevant ; and researching the legal system operation . every day in the united states and other countries , thousands of psychologists appear before and provide expert opinions to courts , administrative proceedings , attorneys , and legislative hearings via reports and sworn testimony . indeed , federal rule of evidence seven hundred and two makes clear under what circumstances psychologists are permitted to testify : a witness who is qualified as an expert by knowledge , skill , experience , training , or education may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise if : the expert scientific , technical , or other specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue ; the testimony is based on sufficient facts or data ; the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods ; and the expert has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts of the case . in these cases , psychologists are offering observations and opinions about a specific person who has been evaluated , and these observations and opinions are considered helpful to the court . in all of these cases , psychologists assess individuals in light of the parameters the law has established for the particular question being addressed in order to gather data and offer opinions that will be presented to the decision makers to assist them in reaching a more informed decision in the matter . in some cases , psychologists can be of assistance to attorneys and the court by conducting and presenting the results of research that addresses important points of contention in litigation . although the kind of questions that are asked and the type of research that is conducted can vary dramatically , common to this work is that the research was conducted in the context of the litigation at hand and designed to answer some casespecific questions.in their influential treatise , walker and monahan described the products of this research as social fact testimony . for example , often in dispute in patent and trademark litigation is the issue of consumer confusion about competing products . in support of its claim , zippo presented results of research conducted expressly for purposes of the litigation , in which participants who were presented with both lighters demonstrated confusion about the brands . the results and interpretation of these data were offered by zippo manufacturing in support of its ultimately successful claim that consumer confusion resulted from the trademarked design similarities . psychologists also conduct research to inform legal decision makers about the knowledge and attitudes members of a jury pool have about a case that is about to go to trial , so as to inform decisions about whether an unbiased jury can be empaneled or whether a change in venue is necessary . such jury venire research , which is conducted in both criminal and civil proceedings , involves developing and administering surveys that query potential members of the jury pool about their knowledge and attitudes concerning the case at hand . psychologists who conduct this research may be called to testify about their findings , thereby providing the court with information about the jury pool that it would not otherwise have , to allow it to make a more informed decision about potential jurors knowledge of case matters and the potential need for a change in venue . for example , a psychologist knowledgeable about research regarding eyewitnesses might be called to testify and educate a jury in a criminal proceeding about the poor relationship between eyewitness confidence and eyewitness accuracy , or how crime witnesses tend to focus on weapons that are brandished and pay less attention to the perpetrator and his or her appearance . or , in a child abuse prosecution , a psychologist knowledgeable about sexual victimization of children might educate the jury about why child victims of sexual abuse do not always come forward immediately to report the abuse or identify the perpetrator . social authority testimony is also introduced in legislative hearings , to inform lawmakers about psychological phenomena that are relevant to pending legislation . psychologists conduct research that examines the legal system and its operation , and their findings can provide direction that is of considerable value . this research is quite varied in nature and focuses on phenomena as disparate as the effectiveness of various legal interventions or programs , the prevalence and characteristics of various phenomena , and the operation of the legal system more generally . what unifies this type of research is its focus on understanding and improving the legal system and its potential to provide important information to those who fashion policy and make laws that shape the legal system and its operation.as an example , in their program of research , redlich and her colleagues have examined the outcomes associated with special mental health courts designed to respond to criminal defendants whose involvement with the criminal justice system is related to their problems with severe and persistent mental illness . peters and his colleagues , in a similar line of research , examined the efficacy of courts devoted to managing the special challenges of offenders with substance abuse problems . common to their involvement in all matters , however , is the fact that psychologists are relying on their expertise to provide helpful information that would otherwise not be available to legal decision makers . we turn next to a discussion of the role that forensic psychologists play in assisting specific legal actors . given that forensic psychology involves the application of psychology to the legal system , it is not surprising that much of the work of forensic psychologists involves assisting specific legal actors . in this section , we discuss the different ways in which forensic psychologists may assist law enforcement agencies , attorneys , litigants and others . within the area of policing and law enforcement , psychologists may play a variety of roles . at the level of investigation , a number of popular books , television shows and movies depict criminal profilers . james brussel , a psychiatrist who began consulting to the new york city police department in the nineteen fifties , described the first case in which he was asked to assist the police . the mad bomber of new york detonated more than twenty bombs in theaters , transportation terminals , libraries , and offices around new york city for sixteen years during the nineteen forties and nineteen fifties . despite notes and letters mailed to them by the bomber , the police were at a loss to identify a suspect and eventually consulted brussel , who examined the evidence the police had collected , including the notes , letters , and photographs and details of the crime scenes . brussel developed a precise criminal profile of the bomber , which turned out to closely match the characteristics of the man the police eventually apprehended and prosecuted . since that time , the field of criminal profiling has developed . of course , in many cases , the efforts of psychologists and psychiatrists have not been so successful , and there remains concern that criminal profiling is nothing more than socalled smoke and mirrors . in reality , most criminal profilers are police officers , but forensic psychologists sometimes are called on to assist with investigations . over time , investigative psychology and offender profiling have developed into an area of forensic psychology with an empirical base , and modern approaches to offender profiling are far removed from the early speculative approaches that are still so often depicted in television and film . psychologists have also conducted research to investigate the efficacy of police interviews and assist police with interviewing witnesses and suspects , including child victims and witnesses . this work assists police in developing interviewing skills for use with witnesses and suspects that will maximize the amount of accurate information that is obtained and minimize bias and error . in addition to direct involvement with police with respect to conducting investigations and questioning witnesses and suspects , psychologists are involved in a range of other activities . psychologists may be called on to assist the police in their interactions with persons with mental disorders . a great deal of work has also been done to assist law enforcement agencies with respect to screening , selection , and recruitment of police candidates and providing critical mental health services to sworn officers and their families . we now turn to a brief review of the roles psychologists play in assisting attorneys . psychologists frequently provide consultation to attorneys with respect to case formulation and jury matters . to this end , some psychologists assist attorneys in conceptualizing and presenting cases in a way that will be most advantageous to their clients . moreover , a growing area of study focuses on the psychology of the jury , in which psychologists assist attorneys by developing strategies for selecting and working with juries . indeed , the area of psychological trial consulting and scientific jury selection has grown significantly over the past two decades . psychologists can assist attorneys by helping them conceptualize their case in a way that will be most compelling for the jury . trial consultants argue that , because attorneys develop specialized legal knowledge , they may not be able to conceptualize cases or present them in a way that will be best understood by the jury . research shows that jurors use a socalled story model to assist them to make sense of the facts presented at trial . according to this model , after hearing the evidence at trial and being provided the legal instructions by the judge at the end of the trial , jurors attempt to find the best match between the arguments made by the competing attorneys and the verdict options . relying on general decisionmaking research and surveys or questionnaires that may be developed for the case at hand , psychologists can assist attorneys by helping them understand how jurors may make sense of and consider the evidence and crafting their arguments accordingly . more recently , psychologists acting as trial consultants have begun to assist attorneys in presenting the information to the jury using modern technology to maximize the effectiveness of their arguments . in addition to challenges for cause , attorneys may challenge a designated number of prospective jurors in each case without providing a justification . with peremptory challenges , prospective jurors may be excluded without a reason stated , without inquiry , and without being subject to the court control . based on the results of the surveys , psychologists can help identify the characteristics of people who would be more or less likely to make a decision in favor of their client . then , during voir dire , potential jurors would be asked a series of questions designed to identify sympathetic and unsympathetic jurors . the complexity and sophistication of mock juries can vary from providing the participants with a summary of information about the case to actually having attorneys present their arguments in a mock trial format . finally , during the course of the trial , jury consultants sometimes employ shadow jurors who sit in the courtroom throughout the trial , listen to the arguments and evidence , and provide the consultant with their perceptions and opinions as the trial proceeds . the attorneys then use this information to shape their subsequent presentations and strategies . assisting litigants and others . with respect to assisting litigants and others in the legal system , psychologists act in quasijudicial capacities and also provide therapeutic services . quasijudicial roles . over the past quarter of a century , psychologists have become increasingly involved in a number of activities in which they serve as decision makers for persons involved in the legal process . psychologists involvement in such activities is presumably predicated upon assumptions that their interpersonal skills provide them with abilities that will facilitate examination and settling of disputes . a number of these activities are presented next . mediation . in some jurisdictions , psychologists can serve as legally recognized mediators , in which they function in a quasijudicial role . mediation is a dispute resolution process that helps persons involved in legal disputes avoid the adversarial process and courtroom litigation . although there is considerable variability across jurisdictions and contexts , mediation at the most general level involves a neutral person who works with parties to a dispute in order to craft an agreement that is acceptable to them , with the understanding that a return to traditional litigation channels will occur if such an agreement can not be reached . unlike many if not most litigants , parents in custody disputes must have continued contact with each other involving matters of their minor children after the court hearing their dispute has rendered a judgment . thus , mediation proponents argue that it can be of particular value in divorce and custody proceedings because of its potential to diminish some of the acrimony and emotion that is associated with the adversarial process . proponents of using mediation in cases of contested custody argue that it has the potential to facilitate settlement of a large number of cases headed for court , speed litigation times , decrease litigation costs , increase compliance with custody agreements , and improve family relationships , including the relationship that the divorcing or separating parents have with each other and their children . some , however , have questioned the value of mediation in matters of divorce and custody . in two thousand and five , the afcc an interdisciplinary organization of attorneys , mental health professionals , social service professionals , and accountants published the model standards of practice for family and divorce mediation , which serve as a guide for the conduct of family mediators , educate service recipients about the mediation process and what to expect , and promote public confidence in mediation as a family dispute resolution process . is designed to help parents implement and comply with court orders or parenting plans , to make timely decisions in a manner consistent with children developmental and psychological needs , to reduce the amount of damaging conflict between caretaking adults to which children are exposed , and to diminish the pattern of unnecessary relitigation about child related issues . parent coordinators generally have responsibility for resolving ongoing and day-to-day disputes that may develop , while the court retains the right to rule on more significant matters . all commentators agree that serving as a parent coordinator is particularly challenging , given the level of conflict that is inherent to all cases , the hybrid role that is assumed by the professional , and the myriad regulatory and professional bodies that might consider the work of the professional . in two thousand and five , the afcc published the guidelines for parenting coordination , the purpose of which is to provide direction to professionals , jurisdictions , and educational institutions regarding appropriate parent coordinator practice ; the parent coordinator ethical obligations ; and educational , training and experience qualifications for parent coordinators . similarly , in two thousand and twelve , the apa published the guidelines for the practice of parenting coordination , the purpose of which is to describe best practices for ethical and competent functioning in this unique role . much of the work of psychologists in the legal system involves treating those within it , including victims and offenders . crime victims . by definition , virtually every crime has a victim . research and clinical experience show that crime victims can experience a range of physical and psychological responses to the event , ranging from transient distress and discomfort to more enduring mental disorders , such as posttraumatic stress disorder . working with victims is a growth area within forensic psychology . accordingly , it is important that greater attention be paid to evidence based approaches that aim to assist victims of crime . much of the work of forensic psychologists involves assessment and treatment of offenders . an expanding body of empirical literature demonstrates that offender rehabilitation can significantly reduce recidivism . contemporary approaches to offender rehabilitation have been drawn from the psychology of criminal conduct and the risk needs responsivity principles that are derived from the model . two general types of factors affect responsivity . one involves factors internal to the individual including , for example , intellectual functioning , selfesteem , and motivation level . a second type involves external factors such as staff characteristics , therapeutic relationships , environmental support , and program content and delivery . taken together , offender rehabilitation programs that are based on the rnr principles have been found to significantly reduce reoffense rates among offenders . the pcc and the development of the rnr model have formed the basis for many of the gains made in offender rehabilitation . using these principles , rates of reoffending can be reduced by as much as thirty percent across different types of offenders . not surprisingly , a voluminous literature examines this issue , most of which has been produced by experimental and social psychologists . similarly , factors associated with increased suggestiblilty of child witnesses and strategies that can be employed to increase accuracy of their accounts are of great import to the legal system . in response , research psychologists have made great contributions in this area as well . a great deal of research literature has been compiled by clinical and experimental psychologists examining the causes , correlates , manifestations , assessment , and treatment of psychopathy . many legal issues involve matters of psychology . these are typically referred to as psycholegal capacities . understanding the nature of these psycholegal capacities is important to both the legal system and the mental health professionals who may be called on to assess persons when such capacities are at issue . predictive evaluations require the psychologist to comment on the likelihood of some future event . in an attempt to identify the causes of violent behavior , a psychologist might investigate its emotional , behavioral , and cognitive correlates and the efficacy of various treatments and interventions . alternatively , psychologists might conduct research examining the accuracy of a test or tool that has been designed to inform mental health professionals judgments about such risk . in both cases , the psychologist is conducting research relevant to an important issue of concern to courts : competence to stand trial or violence risk assessment and intervention.there is no uniform or consensual definition of forensic psychology , and it is clear that psychologists make contributions to the legal system in a multitude of ways . hugo munsterberg , the first and perhaps most ardent proponent of what psychology had to offer the legal system , recognized this more than a century ago . munsterberg s early work was widely castigated , and he could not have fathomed the success and growth the field has seen over the past century . in the century that has passed since munsterberg s book , psychologists have become involved with the legal process and provided assistance to the legal system a multitude of ways , providing assistance to the courts in decision making , researching matters of interest to the legal system , and offering services to persons involved with the legal system . the reason that forensic psychology , as a field , is broad and diverse is that it reflects the breadth and diversity of the law . as such , we can expect an expanding array of topics in law with which psychology can contribute on both the micro and macro levels . accessing the law and legal literature . the term forensic mental health assessment refers to the process by which mental health professionals typically psychologists , psychiatrists , and social workers conduct evaluations for the court and at the request of attorneys , court and at the request of attorneys . given the nature of fmhas , it is incumbent on the mental health professional conducting such an assessment to be familiar with the applicable law in the jurisdiction and the particular legal question at issue in the case . indeed , section two of the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology underscores the necessity for clinicians conducting fmhas to possess knowledge and understanding of the legal and professional standards , laws , rules and precedents that govern participation in legal proceedings . then we provide an overview of the law in the united states , which includes a discussion of various sources of law and the structure of the state and federal court systems . next , we describe specific methods for conducting legal research highlighting both formal and informal approaches using a variety of databases and research tools . we then discuss how to read and interpret the law , which is not an entirely obvious process . finally , after discussing how to ensure that the law found through legal research is good law , we conclude this chapter by describing effective ways of synthesizing the accumulated legal research . by possessing a strong legal background , a forensic mental health professional is better able to identify the legal question and relevant forensic issue in a particular case . in turn , this legal knowledge guides the structure of the evaluation , specifies domains upon which the evaluation should concentrate , informs appropriateness of assessment tools , and helps structure the communication of one findings . prior to developing a methodological approach to conducting an fmha , the clinician should possess a thorough understanding of the law applicable to the case . this distinction has clear implications for the structure of an fmha , and it requires forensic mental health professionals to be familiar with the relevant law.in most forensic contexts , a clinical diagnosis is not sufficient to answer the legal question , so an individual functional legal capacities must be analyzed to relate his or her observable abilities to the relevant legal concept . these functional abilities must be relevant to the legal question and causally related to a clinical disorder . a mental health professional must therefore understand the legal question to be able to operationalize and identify the relevant forensic issues and functional legal capacities and to develop an appropriate structure for the assessment . there is , however , at least one circumstance in which a clinical diagnosis constitutes the ultimate legal issue . specifically , in atkins virginia , the us supreme court categorically excluded offenders with mental retardation from capital punishment on the grounds that executing such offenders would violate the eighth amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment . in cases such as this in which a brightline rule has been established , the structure of the fmha is relatively straightforward . similarly , the evaluator will be better equipped to focus on important domains during collateral interviews and while reviewing legal documents . although many types of fmha require a circumscribed assessment of a small number of clinically relevant domains , other types of fmhas such as child custody and capital mitigation require a much broader assessment that focuses on a number of areas . here again , appropriately appraising the legal question and relevant forensic issues drives the focus of the evaluation . once the relevant forensic issues are identified , the clinician must select a specific assessment approach to examine the evaluee functional legal capacities . these evidentiary standards compel forensic evaluators both to select well validated psychological assessment instruments and be familiar with the psychometric properties of the tools they use . rule seven hundred and two of the federal rules of evidence and the us supreme court decision in daubert merrell dow pharmaceuticals stress relevance and reliability as the critical elements for the acceptance of scientific evidence in court . although the federal court system and the majority of states have adopted the evidentiary admissibility standard outlined in daubert , the less stringent frye admissibility standard is still used in several jurisdictions . importantly , a forensic mental health professional conducting an fmha may be held to different criteria depending on which evidentiary standard applies in the jurisdiction in which an evaluation occurs . as such , it is crucial that forensic mental health professionals consider the relevant evidentiary standards when selecting measures and scientific approaches for conducting the evaluation to ensure that their testimony will be admissible in court . in addition to guiding evaluation procedures , knowledge of relevant laws plays a key role in shaping conclusions and communication of findings in fmhas . unfortunately , however , as heilbrun notes , many clinicians falsely espouse the belief that a good clinical evaluation will serve in forensic cases , while others fail to distinguish properly between different forensic issues . such oversight has led some courts to become disenchanted with the field of forensic mental health and for some judges to express concern that forensic mental health professionals have failed to deliver what the legal system needs . this has led to a growing literature regarding various concerns about fmhas , many of which appear to be directly related to forensic mental health professionals lack of sufficient legal knowledge . prominent criticisms highlighted by grisso over twenty five years ago include ignorance and irrelevance , intrusion into matters of law , and insufficiency and incredibility of information . each of these concerns is briefly discussed . clinician ignorance of the laws driving a particular evaluation and the subsequent irrelevance of their data are of clear relevance to this discussion . organizations such as the american psychology law society and the american academy of forensic psychology have worked to correct this type of oversight by publishing guidelines that emphasize the responsibility of forensic mental health professionals to understand the legal standards pertaining to an evaluation and how these standards relate to clinical practice . the second concern highlighted by grisso intrusion into matters of law is driven primarily by lack of sufficient legal knowledge . this particular mistake generally occurs when forensic mental health professionals inappropriately provide testimony on the ultimate legal issue . there is a vigorous debate within the forensic psychology field regarding whether it is appropriate for forensic experts to answer the ultimate legal question in a particular case . the third concern highlighted by grisso concerns the insufficiency and lack of credibility of some clinicians reports , which is likely caused at least in part by an insufficient grasp of the relevant legal issues . specifically , clinicians conducting fmhas have been criticized for drawing conclusions that have insufficient supporting evidence and rendering opinions that lack credibility . it would seem that a clinician well versed in the evidentiary standards and other laws applicable in the evaluation jurisdiction would be much less likely to offer conclusions based on insufficient scientific evidence . by enhancing their knowledge of relevant laws and becoming more aware of how to conduct legal research , forensic mental health professionals can take an important step toward becoming more competent providers of fmhas , which will in turn provide attorneys and courts with more useful information . the net result will be a legal system that makes better informed decisions . fortunately , efforts undertaken by experts and organizations in the field have helped mitigate problems associated with fmhas . nevertheless , there remains a need to continue working to improve the competence of forensic mental health professionals and the overall quality of fmhas , and a good starting point in that undertaking is having a solid understanding of the law . laws come from a variety of sources and appear in various formats . we have written this section , and the entire chapter for that matter , to help bend that learning curve in a favorable direction.in the united states , multiple entities provide the laws that govern society , but two main forces are typically at play : the federal government and state governments . due to the tenth amendment , the federal government and state governments have separate powers , and states are sovereign in many respects . both the federal government and state governments can be subdivided into their respective legislative , judicial , and executive branches . this type of law the law on the books or black letter law is referred to as statutory law . statutory law flows from statutes enacted by legislatures , at either the federal level or the state level . these statutes are then compiled into federal or state codes , which we discuss in more detail later in the chapter . many statutes are quite old , having been enacted decades ago and having never been revised . others are comparatively young for example , statutes enacted by legislative authority to address emerging concerns or new issues not previously covered under statute . statutes may also be revised by the issuing authority to address concerns relating to content or scope . as the courts interpret and apply a statute one case at a time , collections of judicial decisions amass . these decisions are referred to as case law or common law . judges may choose to follow this legal precedent , interpreting the law similarly to judges who have already reviewed the issue . however , a judge may choose to depart from precedent altogether or identify the case before the court as factually distinct and therefore not guided by precedent . in so doing , the courts create new case law . new case law may simply answer previously unanswered legal questions , or it may effectively change the law in the jurisdiction , even if no new statute has been enacted . rather , state constitutions may differ from the us constitution , with one very important caveat : state constitutions may not provide less protection than the us constitution , although they may provide more protection . the three major sources of law discussed thus far are all considered to be primary sources because they are the sources that effectively make the law . in addition to these primary sources , there are secondary sources of law . broadly speaking , secondary sources can be anything describing or summarizing the law that do not fall into one of the aforementioned primary sources . legal encyclopedia provide broad and general information on a specific topic of law , and they are much like a traditional encyclopedia in both breadth and depth . last , the restatements of law are an effort by the american law institute to organize , summarize , and codify the common law of the united states . covering fifteen separate areas , the restatements sometimes straddle the line between primary and secondary sources . whereas they are in themselves a secondary source because they synthesize the law in a given area , it is not unusual for judges to rely on the restatements as persuasive authority in deciding a novel legal issue . secondary sources of law can be tremendously helpful to both novice and expert legal researchers . a forensic mental health professional engaging in best practices should be familiar with relevant statutory law and case law on a given legal question , and that task can be accomplished more easily by utilizing the secondary legal sources just described . having explored where law comes from , it is also necessary to understand which laws are applied by which courts . just as the united states has two major government systems that make the law , so too does it have two major court systems to apply those laws : federal courts and state courts . each court system can be generally divided again into criminal and civil courts . state courts hear state matters : crimes violating state law and civil disputes arising between residents of the same state . federal courts hear federal matters : crimes violating federal law and civil disputes arising between residents of different states . criminal courts handle trials brought by the government against an individual . although the typical parties in a civil case are individuals , companies , or corporations , the state can also be party to certain civil proceedings that have relevance to forensic practice . for example , the state is party to a civil commitment proceeding in which an individual may be involuntarily committed to a psychiatric facility if he or she is a danger to self or others . the state is also responsible for challenging parental rights in cases of child abuse or neglect , which are also handled in civil court . because so many legal questions are answered in the civil courtroom , civil courts are subdivided into various levels , and the civil court system contains a variety of specialized courts , such as probate courts , family courts , and landlord tenant courts . although this organization may seem fairly clearcut , various complications can make jurisdiction confusing in both criminal and civil matters . indeed , there are entire courses in many law schools dedicated exclusively to the topic of jurisdiction . a few examples regarding criminal jurisdiction may help illuminate some of the complexities relating to it . murder , for example , is typically characterized as a crime against the state . typically a case is heard at the lowest tier in its relevant jurisdiction , which is called the court of first instance because it is the first court to hear the case . however , through a process of appeals , cases may move up the hierarchy to be reviewed by courts of greater authority . because both the state and federal court systems have respective tiers and exist parallel to one another , one can conceptualize the us court system as a wide staircase with an iron handrail running up the middle . on one side of the rail lie the federal courts , and the state court system lies on the other side of the rail ; the lowest step is the court of first instance , and the top step is the highest court that has the final say on an issue . civil trial courts apply penalties that are typically limited to monetary damages and injunctions . moving one step up from the trial courts but remaining in the state court system are the intermediate appellate courts . appellate courts have appellate jurisdiction , which means that they hear cases that have been appealed . if a party is dissatisfied with the trial court ruling , the party may attempt to appeal the case up to the appellate court . however , not all cases are eligible for appeal , and being eligible for an appeal does not guarantee that the appeal will be granted . grounds for appeal vary by case and jurisdiction , but they often involve procedural error . simply being unhappy with having lost the case is not sufficient grounds to be granted an appeal . rather , the case must have an appealable issue. toward that end , appellate courts rarely reexamine the facts of the case . in most states , the state high court is a discretionary court , meaning it is not required to hear any cases on appeal and only decides cases that it accepts . typically , once the state high court rules on an issue , its decision is final . however , it is possible that a case resolved at the state high court can be reheard in the federal court system . we address this topic after covering the federal court system . it is worth noting that states often have different names for the trial , appellate , and high courts in their jurisdictions . one major difference , though , is that whereas a state trial court has only one judge presiding , a federal district court is presided over by a three judge panel . there are ninety four district courts spread geographically across the continental united states and outlying states and territories . all states fall under the geographic jurisdiction of at least one district court , with many states falling under the jurisdiction of multiple district courts . the federal district courts have general jurisdiction , and they hear both civil and criminal matters . like state trial courts , federal district courts determine the facts of a case and resolve the dispute . as in the state system , cases move up the federal court system through an appeals process . the intermediate federal courts are known as the united states circuit courts of appeal . fewer in number than the district courts , these thirteen circuit courts are similarly spread out across the united states . the thirteen circuit courts include eleven regional courts numbered one through eleven , the twelveth circuit for the district of columbia , and the federal circuit court . all of the circuit courts , except for the federal circuit court , have jurisdiction over the courts in their region ; the federal circuit court has nationwide jurisdiction , but it hears only certain types of cases . unique to the supreme court is its composition of eight associate justices and one chief justice . there is , however , no basis in the constitution for setting the number of justices at nine . article iii of the us constitution authorizes congress to establish the number of supreme court justices , and the size of the supreme court has been changed a few times over the years . for example , the judiciary act of one thousand, seven hundred and eighty nine called for the appointment of six justices , but the supreme court was expanded to seven members in one thousand, eight hundred and seven , nine members in one thousand, eight hundred and thirty seven , and ten members in one thousand, eight hundred and sixty three. the judiciary act of one thousand, eight hundred and sixty nine set the number of justices at nine , and it has remained at this size since that time . each justice is appointed by the president , confirmed by the senate , and serves for life . typically , the supreme court is charged with interpreting the us constitution , meaning that it reviews whether lower court decisions comported or conflicted with constitutional rights and protections . however , the supreme court also addresses other matters relating to federal law . like most state high courts , the supreme court has discretionary jurisdiction . each year , thousands of cases are appealed to the us supreme court , but it hears only a small fraction of those cases . at least four of the nine justices must agree to hear a case , and at least five of the nine justices must agree on the outcome for there to be a majority opinion when deciding the case . the supreme court has jurisdiction over all cases decided by federal circuit courts and all cases from state courts that implicate the us constitution or federal law . as the highest court in the united states , all decisions of the us supreme court are final . once a case has jumped over the rail into the federal court system , the case remains in the federal system . thus , any appeals flowing from the federal district court findings must go through the federal appellate process . another way for a case to move from the state court system to the federal court system is by a writ of certiorari . if issued , a writ of certiorari provides that a case will be heard by the us supreme court . toward that end , a writ of certiorari can bring a case before the us supreme court after the case has been settled by either a federal court of appeals or a state high court . in contrast with habeas corpus , writs of certiorari must be filed within ninety days of a judgment being entered . however , it is the supreme court that announces whether it will grant an appeal by issuing a writ of certiorari to the appellant . this makes sense given the meaning of writ of certiorari , which can be translated as to be more fully informed. recent statistics suggest that the supreme court receives roughly seven petitions for certiorari each year but typically only grants one percent to two percent of the petitions .having discussed the sources of law and how cases move through the different courts systems , it is important to understand the reach or influence of a court ruling . united states courts follow a system of stare decisis , short for the latin phrase stare decisis et non quieta movere , roughly translated to mean maintain what has been decided and do not alter that which has been established . therein lies the nature of binding authority versus persuasive authority . if the earlier ruling came from a higher court in the same jurisdiction , then a judge is bound to follow that court ruling . because the judge is bound , it is referred to as binding authority . for example , if the supreme court of california rules on an issue , the lower courts within california are expected to follow the state supreme court ruling . strictly speaking , the judge in a lower court is not mandated to follow the higher court ruling ; should the judge deviate , he or she will not be fined , removed , or otherwise penalized , although reelection may be more difficult if the issue is polarizing . but such a deviation would certainly provide grounds for appeal . by contrast , a court reviewing decisions from a lower court or a court in another jurisdiction is not bound by those decisions . attorneys arguing before the court may cite these other rulings and cases as examples of how they would like the court to rule , attempting to persuade the court to follow the lead set by other courts . thus , persuasive authority may help guide a court toward a decision , but there should be no expectation that the court will follow it . all decisions by the us supreme court are binding on federal courts , but not all us supreme court decisions are binding on state courts . the determining factor is whether the legal issue implicates state courts or only federal courts . for example , if the us supreme court determines that execution is unconstitutional because it constitutes cruel and unusual punishment under the eighth amendment , then no states may execute offenders . however , if the supreme court decision is limited to federal courts for example , how the fre are to be interpreted then that decision does not affect state courts . although there are many research options available , forensic mental health professionals must be knowledgeable about which option is best suited for their particular needs . some options for researching the law are more formal and presume some degree of legal knowledge , whereas other options are quite informal and require no upfront legal knowledge ; some options for conducting legal research are expensive and perhaps cost prohibitive to some mental health professionals , whereas other options are free and available to anyone with an internet connection ; and some resources provide comprehensive coverage of federal and state case law , federal and state statutes , and secondary legal literature , whereas other resources primarily provide coverage of recent decisions from the us supreme court . in this section , we review the many options that are available for conducting legal research . perhaps the best known option for conducting legal research is commercially available electronic legal databases . the two undisputed leaders in this industry westlaw and lexisnexis are likely familiar to most readers , even those without formal legal training who have never conducted legal research . both of these electronic legal databases provide comprehensive coverage of primary and secondary legal materials , and numerous courts , law firms , attorneys , and other legal professionals throughout the united states and many other countries have a long history of relying on these databases . westlaw and lexisnexis are available only by paid subscription and therefore may not be available for those with limited economic resources , although many university libraries and some public libraries subscribe to these databases . both westlaw and lexisnexis have been providing commercially available legal research services since the early nineteen seventies . when these companies were first started , which was largely preinternet and certainly before the days of widespread personal computers , these services were available as dialup services via dedicated terminals . it was not until the late nineteen eighties that both companies began offering internet based programs for use on personal computers , and that marked a watershed moment in legal research . westlaw was started by west publishing , which has been headquartered in eagan , minnesota , since nineteen ninety two , and it was acquired by thomson corporation in nineteen ninety six . importantly , though , coverage of trial court decisions is largely limited to federal courts ; the state cases included in westlaw typically are limited to appellate decisions . westlaw has also been providing increasing coverage of international law , and a variety of westlaw services are currently available in nearly seventy countries worldwide . besides its comprehensive coverage of legal materials , westlaw has several features that make it user friendly . for example , west developed a proprietary classification system west key number system that provides a standardized taxonomy for all us legal materials . using this system , numerous points of law are organized by topic and key number , which makes it easier for users to identify materials that are relevant to their needs . westlaw offers several search features , including natural language and boolean , and it is possible to search , for example , through all state and federal cases or to limit a search to cases from one jurisdiction . as mentioned , westlaw primary competitor is lexisnexis . lexisnexis has undergone several name changes since the early nineteen seventies , and it is currently headquartered in dayton , ohio . like westlaw , lexisnexis provides comprehensive coverage of state and federal case law , state and federal statutes , administrative regulations , and secondary legal resources . as with westlaw , there is limited coverage of trial court opinions at the state level . lexisnexis provides extensive coverage of published us cases dating back to the late one thousand, seven hundreds , and it also provides wide ranging coverage of other primary and secondary legal resources . the nexis aspect of lexisnexis is dedicated to providing access to content from thousands of global news sources , public records , legislative and regulatory filings , and many other types of legal materials . like westlaw , lexisnexis offers a variety of services and features that enhance its usability and popularity , including services that allow those conducting legal research to determine if a particular law is still good law . westlaw and lexisnexis have set the standard when it comes to electronic legal databases , but the services they provide can be costly . some services may be available for a few dollars , while other services can cost thousands of dollars in a given billing period . not too long ago , commercial databases such as lexisnexis and westlaw were the only options available for conducting legal research . fortunately for those who find westlaw and lexisnexis to be cost prohibitive or unavailable , several electronic databases that are considerably less costly sometimes even free have been developed in recent years . a few examples are presented here . thelaw provides coverage of all federal cases , all federal bankruptcy cases , and most state court cases from nineteen fifty ; all state and federal statutes and regulations ; judicial and administrative rules and forms ; and several other legal resources . as of this writing , annual subscriptions range from five hundred and seventy five for unlimited use by one lawyer and one paralegal to one for unlimited use by five lawyers and five paralegals . national law library offers a wide variety of subscription plans , including a federal plan , a single state plan , an all states plus federal plan , and a plan that charges by the transaction . versuslaw provides coverage of all federal court cases , all state appellate court cases , state and federal statutes , and some additional legal resources . subscription plans for versuslaw range from a standard plan for thirteen , to a professional plan for thirty nine . there are also several free electronic resources that provide a wealth of legally relevant information . for example , findlaw is a popular option that contains state and federal case law and state and federal statutes , and it also offers access to recent legal news , an attorney directory , education about various legal topics , and a free legal magazine . cornell university legal information institute is a useful resource for mental health professionals interested in conducting legal research . it offers access to numerous legal resources , such as the us constitution , state and federal statutes , and us supreme court decisions . it also includes user friendly resources , such as a legal dictionary and encyclopedia , to facilitate interpretation and comprehension of various laws . many law schools and law libraries maintain web sites that provide useful information for laypeople interested in conducting legal research . the southern illinois university school of law library maintains a useful web site , with a variety of free and helpful tips , articles , and blogs on conducting research . the georgetown law library maintains a similar web site that includes selfguided tutorials for learning about legal research . finally , google scholar , which has offered a legal opinions and journals database since two thousand and nine , exemplifies recent improvements in public accessibility to legal resources . fortunately , there are a variety of less formal approaches to conducting legal research . these informal approaches are often as helpful as formal approaches and may be more desirable and practical for forensic clinicians in many situations . for example , forensic mental health professionals may benefit from utilizing libraries and various print materials and from networking and consulting with other professionals and organizations within the forensic psychology and legal fields . although the internet provides an abundance of information about various legal topics and sources of law , print sources are a viable alternative to electronic sources of legal material . these print sources are available in law school libraries and occasionally even public libraries , and many law schools permit visitors to use their library at certain times . legal digests , which are series of books that provide brief overviews of the points of law contained in important cases , often serve as a particularly useful starting point when conducting an informal legal search . legal encyclopedias are similarly beneficial in providing an introduction to a particular area of law . legal encyclopedias are accessible and user friendly , and they provide citations to primary sources of law . the two primary legal encyclopedias , american jurisprudence and corpus juris secundum , are excellent resources for both novice and experienced forensic mental health professionals , which is one of the most frequently referenced legal encyclopedias , is relatively selective in its coverage of topics , which enhances its readability . cjs is more exhaustive , containing lengthier and more detailed entries than those found in . the legal treatises and hornbooks discussed previously are also useful sources of secondary legal authority . finally , a number of books have been written over the past few decades specifically targeted at mental health professionals interested in fmhas . the law and mental health professionals series , published by the apa , provides a comprehensive overview of state specific information about many legal topics relevant to forensic practice . the oxford series includes books dedicated to specific forensic topics , such as violence risk assessment , competence to stand trial , civil commitment , and personal injury , and each book covers the legal standards applicable to the type of assessment it is covering . numerous other books written for and by forensic mental health professionals are available as useful sources of legal information . some of these books focus on specific types of fmhas , and others focus more broadly on the process of conducting fmhas . legal periodicals and other scholarly journals may also assist the forensic mental health professional in acquiring valuable legal information that will facilitate his or her understanding of relevant law . although many legal periodicals emphasize legal topics that are not directly relevant to fmhas , other publications specialize in psycholegal topics that are likely to be particularly useful to clinicians who conduct fmhas . law reviews are a valuable type of legal periodical . the university of alabama law and psychology review is one such journal likely to assist forensic clinicians interested in gleaning information about applicable law . another relevant law review is the mental health law and policy journal , published by the cecil humphreys school of law at the university of memphis . in addition to law reviews , other types of legal periodicals may be useful . the journal of psychiatry and law and the american journal of law and medicine are peerreviewed journals that include articles with clear relevance to forensic practice . a number of other scholarly peerreviewed journals focus on interdisciplinary topics related to psychology and law . psychology , public policy , and law , which is a hybrid law psychology journal , and law and human behavior are two examples of journals published by the apa that provide legal information relevant to forensic clinicians . articles published in such nonlegal periodicals typically are not written using highly technical language and are therefore more likely to be comprehensible to forensic mental health professionals who do not have formal legal training . although the printed legal resources just discussed are available for purchase , many of them are also accessible for free at local libraries and university libraries . forensic mental health professionals are encouraged to obtain particularly helpful legal digests , treatises , or other legal resources to have on hand as convenient references . however , the advantages of utilizing public , university , and law libraries should not be overlooked . although these libraries generally do not house as many legal resources as law libraries , they typically contain sufficiently large legal collections to be of use to forensic clinicians interested in conducting legal research . mental health professionals interested in increasing their legal knowledge will certainly benefit from consulting print and electronic legal resources , but the value of seeking information and consultation from professional organizations and knowledgeable colleagues can not be overstated . organizations such as the apls often provide opportunities to practitioners interested in augmenting their legal knowledge . apls , for example , hosts workshops and an annual conference , offers a network of knowledgeable scholars and forensic clinicians , and provides a number of useful resources online . the apls web site provides links to more than a dozen external sources related to law and mental health . these external sites supply valuable information on topics such as mental health law decisions from the us circuit courts of appeal , landmark cases , and important legal updates germane to forensic mental health professionals . similarly , the ali , which is self described as an organization dedicated to clarifying , modernizing , and improving the law , is another optimal resource for forensic clinicians . mental health practitioners conducting fmhas can obtain a wealth of legal knowledge by consulting resources on the ali web site or contacting the organization directly . finally , there are a variety of continuing education workshops that offer legally relevant information for forensic mental health professionals . in addition to networking and taking advantage of training opportunities through professional organizations , forensic mental health professionals interested in enhancing their legal knowledge can seek counsel from knowledgeable and experienced colleagues . referring attorneys are an obvious legal resource , and forensic mental health professionals can gain guidance on relevant law from the referring attorney . experienced forensic mental health practitioners , other attorneys , and other legal professionals can also serve as valuable resources for clinicians interested in enhancing their legal knowledge . consulting with experienced colleagues about relevant law , applicable psycholegal standards , proper assessment techniques , and other matters relevant to fmhas is highly recommended and should be considered a best practice . in fact , a common criticism levied against attorneys , judges , and lawmakers is that they make the law inaccessible to the lay individual . one such method of keeping the law at arm reach or hiding the ball a bit of law school jargon is by the way they write the judicial decisions and statutes . although a growing movement of lawyers advocate for plain english drafting , many persist with tradition , and of course all settled law and cases remain written in traditional style . it is not uncommon for new students of the law , after first reading through a case , to be left with no idea of what they have just read . a statute may read like a list , within a larger list , containing its own sublists ; a judicial opinion might read like one long runon sentence in outdated prose or olde english . making sense of it all can prove to be a daunting task , even for those with formal legal training . once the statute being sought is identified , the first step is to read it to confirm that it is the correct statute . even if some of the statutory details are skipped over , a quick read of the statute should , it is hoped , confirm that it is indeed the correct statute that was being sought . after confirming it is the correct statute , a few rules of interpretation are worth following . the first section of many statutes defines key terms that are used later in the statute , and being familiar with these definitions provides a context for interpreting the statute . look for whether the elements in the statute are conjunctive or disjunctive ; whether a legal disposition rests on several elements being met versus one of several elements can affect the interpretation of a statute . similarly , look for key terms like may and shall. although it is tempting to read them over quickly , these are examples of legalese that confer specific requirements . an individual who shall do something violates the statute if he or she fails to do so . toward that end , resist the temptation to infer a word or phrase meaning based on context . thus , it becomes the responsibility of the researcher to determine how a case or cases fit into the overall area of law . this synthesis of case law is one of the most challenging aspects of legal research for the novice and experienced researcher alike . however , convention dictates that cases are typically organized in a similar fashion , or that they at least contain certain elements . knowing what to look for is an effective way to sift through a lengthy legal decision and take away only the most important information . the text of major cases can be divided into five categories : facts , procedural history , issue , legal reasoning , and holding ; a possible sixth category is legal precedent , but this category can be subsumed under legal reasoning . the five categories also tend to appear in this order , although there may be a summary of information provided by westlaw or lexisnexis . the facts of the case vary in length but are typically as brief as possible while still conveying all necessary information to provide the relevant context . the procedural history consists of the legal history of the case since its inception , including the holding by the court of original instance , appeals filed , appeals granted , and the like . although information about such things as pretrial motions , testimony , and evidence may straddle the line between facts and procedural history , in practice the distinction is often insignificant . the facts and procedural history contextualize a case . however , the issue , the legal reasoning , and the holding are what make each case unique and what the legal researcher is ultimately looking for when reading a case . the issue is a shorthand name for the legal question the court is answering in its review . sometimes the judicial opinion will clearly state the issue . in other instances , the court may talk about the case turning or hinging on , for example , whether the court decides to interpret the law in one way or another . by the end of a case , the court has answered the legal issue in its holding . the explanation connecting the issue to the holding is the court reasoning . depending on whether the researcher is looking at the case as potentially binding or persuasive authority , emphasis may be placed more on the holding or the reasoning . in the case of binding authority , the holding is the most important component of the case . although even when looking for binding authority , the legal reasoning by which the court arrived at its holding should not be overlooked . to do so could risk misunderstanding or misusing the case or being caught off guard by citing a case that is not fully understood . when relying on a case as persuasive authority , the legal reasoning is as important as the holding . confirming that something is good law can happen at the front end of research by making sure the research is properly executed , or it can happen at the back end by making sure the law being relied on is still valid authority . in practice , individuals who are savvy at conducting legal research check the status of law on a rolling process throughout the research process , making sure that any time spent reading the legal literature is well invested . we suggest this approach , although we recommend at the very least that the validity check happen as a final step before submitting a report or appearing in court . an attorney or forensic mental health practitioner relying on outdated or bad law may be committing procedural errors , making mistakes in practice , or making faulty assumptions . although it is somewhat tautological to say as much , a legal authority is good law unless it has otherwise been made bad law . what is important to note is that a legal researcher need not in fact , may be unable to find history supporting or confirming that something is in fact good law . the important point here is that something is good law unless something is found to the contrary . thus , a case published very recently is likely to be good law , if for no other reason than there has not been time for it to be reversed , overruled , updated , or repealed . on a related note , a decision being old should not automatically raise the inference that it is bad law . plenty of law remains settled for decades . however , westlaw and lexisnexis have two proprietary terms for determining whether something is good law : keyciting and shepardizing . the term shepardizing refers to using shepard citations , which was the first system by which cases and their subsequent history were tracked . shepard citations provides all subsequent authority that cite a legal authority and also whether any court has overruled the original opinion , which would make it bad law . for purposes of this chapter , it is important to emphasize that westlaw and lexisnexis provide all relevant procedural history at the click of a mouse , for any case , statute , or regulation . it should be obvious at that point whether the authority is still good law , but both westlaw and lexis provide tutorials and round the clock customer support if there are still questions about whether it is good law . although some university and public libraries offer access to westlaw and lexisnexis , these services may be unavailable to many people . as such , it is worth discussing how to determine whether something is good law without the aid of westlaw or lexisnexis . earlier in the chapter , we discussed three types of law : statutory law , case law , and constitutional law . constitutional law does not change unless a constitution is amended , which is a fairly rare occurrence , so determining whether you have good law is most relevant when it comes to statutory law and case law . with respect to statutes , a statute is good law unless it has been repealed or superseded by a new statute or declared unconstitutional by the court . a classic example of a statute being declared unconstitutional is the us supreme court decision in dred scott sandford , in which the supreme court declared a recent act of congress to be unconstitutional . in this regrettable decision , the supreme court concluded that african americans brought into the united states and held as slaves were not , in fact , citizens of the united states and therefore not entitled to protection under the us constitution . to determine whether a statute has been repealed or superseded by a newer statute , a good starting point is determining when the statutory code was most recently updated . then it is important to check which statutes have been updated or enacted since that update . this information is located in what is called the pocket part of the code . essentially , because statutes change regularly and reprinting codes is expensive , many legal references are purchased as part of a subscription . as with statutory law , case law can become bad law when a new statute supersedes the case law or a new case replaces the old legal rule . however , evaluating whether a case is still good law is a bit more complicated than for a statute . as such , it is necessary to discuss some new terminology . a case is not good law if it has been reversed or overruled or if the statute on which it was based has been updated . the term reversed means that a higher court reviewed the specific case and disagreed with the lower court , reversing the lower court decision . overruled means that another case occurred at a later date but involved the same legal issue , and the court decided the issue differently than it had previously . a classic example is the brown board of education desegregation decision , which overturned the separate but equal doctrine upheld in plessy fergusson . for example , if the results of legal research yield a trial court case but later research reveals that the case was ultimately reviewed by the us supreme court , in almost all situations the supreme court case would be cited . this illustrates that checking the validity of a case is useful not just to make sure something is good legal authority but also to make sure that the highest legal authority for a given legal issue has been identified . after investigating a case procedural history , it is necessary to determine whether any statutes have been enacted that have changed the case from good law to bad law . this is a bit more arduous but basically involves reading the case and looking for any statutes the court references in the opinion . if the court does cite one or more statutes , then it must be determined whether that statute was related to a legal issue in the case . if the statute was related to a legal issue in the case or if the case turned on how the court interpreted the statute , it is necessary to see whether that statute has been updated . if the statute has been updated , it becomes necessary to interpret the change in light of the case , synthesizing the literature that has been amassed . only at that point is it possible to determine whether the case is good law or has been overruled by the statute . one complication has to do with the degree to which someone is relying on a given legal authority . thus , if a court higher than the one that decided a particular case has reversed or overruled the decision , then the case at hand is bad law . if , however , a court in another jurisdiction has simply declined to adopt the approach taken by the case at hand , then the case is still good law , although there is now persuasive authority against the case . a judge wishing to do otherwise might try to distinguish the facts of the case at hand so the argument can be made that he or she is not answering the same legal question differently but rather answering a related but slightly different question . having found , digested , and ascertained the validity of the relevant statutes and cases , the final step involves synthesizing the authorities . synthesizing may sound easy at first ; after all , is it not simply putting together all of the information into a list of holdings ? sometimes synthesis is this simple , and by bringing together all of the relevant holdings and statutes on a legal issue , it is possible to infer the legal rules the courts will likely follow when addressing a given legal issue . however , it is not unusual to find multiple authorities that may seem to contradict one another . based on the previous discussion about determining whether something is good law , the obvious answer in such a situation would be that something is bad law . but what if nothing has been overruled , superseded , or revised ? in such a situation , a series of questions may alleviate the confusion . first , are the cases and statutes in the same jurisdiction ? second , is everything still good law ? if the answer to both of those questions is yes , then the most likely explanation is that there is some minor distinction between the cases or statutes . stated another way , the cases are not , in fact , addressing the same legal issue . after all , very similar legal issues can be answered in entirely different ways . at the time of this writing , for example , the us supreme court has concluded that the death penalty does not violate the eighth amendment , unless of course the defendant is intellectually disabled or was under the age of eighteen at the time of the offense . this illustrates how what may have looked like one legal issue is in fact three separate issues . thus , synthesizing can sometimes feel more like reconciling , but the importance of this step can not be overstated . after all , if all of the research is not correctly synthesized , resulting in some mistake of law , much of the research process will have been for naught . understanding how to access , find , interpret , and synthesize the law is a widereaching topic that can fill many volumes . the existence of countless books and legal resources devoted entirely to the subject of legal research attests to the complexity and breadth of material that we could have covered in this chapter . in this chapter , we have provided a broad outline designed to help forensic mental health professionals become more comfortable and efficient in conducting legal research , which we believe will enhance the quality of their forensic work . professions derive considerable benefit from having a set of principles , standards , and guidelines that constitute their code of ethics . a code of ethics serves important purposes for professionals and the public they serve . for practitioners , an ethics code provides a moral compass to guide their conduct and help shape their decisions in uncertain situations . it lends prestige to their profession , fosters pride in their allegiance to values and skills shared with their colleagues , and enhances their sense of professional identity . for the public , the existence of an ethics code fosters their trust in a profession , informs them about what they can expect from practitioners in the profession , and safeguards their welfare by deterring unethical professional conduct . having been penalized in these ways can prevent practitioners from securing liability insurance , being listed in directories and on insurance reimbursement panels , and , most critically for forensic psychologists , having credibility as an expert witness whose integrity will not be impugned in the courtroom . along with being potential sources of penalties when violated , ethics codes and the committees and boards that enforce them can provide support when practicing psychologists confront problematic expectations or unreasonable demands . in an illustrative case , a patient whose therapist assigned her some reading complained to an ethics committee that he was abandoning her and failing to provide adequate care . acting on the psychologist behalf , the committee that heard the patient complaint informed her that bibliotherapy was a legitimate and acceptable way for her therapist to augment her sessions in an effort to be helpful , and the complaint was not pursued further . in these instances , psychologists can refer to their ethical obligation to make reasonable efforts to maintain the security of test materials as well as to copyright laws safeguarding published tests , to appeal to the court that the released information should have restricted circulation and consist of test data but not test forms . to practice principled forensic psychology , psychologists must recognize both the constraining and the supportive features of ethics codes and related guidelines and conduct themselves in a professionally proper manner at all times . the main document providing psychologists direction for ethical conduct is the just mentioned ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct promulgated by the apa . of particular relevance for psychologists involved in family law cases are two additional documents promulgated by the apa : guidelines for the practice of parenting coordination and guidelines for psychological evaluation in child protection matters . like the general principles in the ethics code , the forensic specialty , child custody , parenting coordination , and child protection guidelines are not mandatory rules of conduct and were not intended to constitute a basis for disciplinary action or legal liability . instead , these guidelines are aspirational in nature and recommend various procedures for maintaining high quality forensic services . forensic practitioners should be as familiar with these recommended procedures as they are with the obligatory rules of conduct in the ethics code . this chapter reviews the five general principles and ten specific standards in the apa ethics code , with attention to their implications for forensic practice and how they may be elaborated in the forensic specialty and child custody guidelines . fidelity and responsibility . psychologists should establish trusting relationships with their clients , clarify their professional roles and obligations , and coordinate services with other professionals to each client benefit . they should in addition attend to the ethical probity of colleagues and provide some measure of pro bono service . integrity . psychologists should promote truthfulness in research , teaching , and practice and avoid dishonesty , deception , subterfuge , and misrepresentation of fact . should they deem any deception justifiable , they should consider carefully whether it is necessary , whether the benefits of the deception outweigh any adverse consequences it might have , and what steps should be taken to minimize or repair any resulting harmful effects of the deception . justice . psychologists should allow equal access to their services by all people , whether advantaged or disadvantaged and whatever their background , and they should provide services of equal quality to all . psychologists should take reasonable care to prevent any biases or limitations of their competence from leading to improper or inadequate practices on their part . respect for people rights and dignity . psychologists should respect the dignity and worth of all people and their rights to privacy and autonomy . as previously stated , the apa ethics code comprises ten specific standards intended to serve as enforceable rules of conduct that psychologists are obliged to follow . unlike the general principles to which psychologists should aspire , these standards constitute requirements they are expected to meet in order to remain in compliance with the ethics code . the standards deal broadly with considerations in practice , teaching , and research , and they vary in their specific implications for practicing principled forensic psychology . however , forensic psychologists are psychologists first and forensic specialists second , and they are accordingly responsible for ensuring that all of their professional actions are consistent with the ethics code . to protect psychologists from feeling obliged to comply with demands to engage in inhumane conduct and to prevent psychologists from appealing to orders from above to justify such conduct , this provision was replaced with under no circumstances may this standard be used to justify or defend violating human rights . other parts of the standard on ethical issues address procedures to follow should psychologists suspect ethical violations by another psychologist . ordinarily in such instances , an informal contact with the suspected violator should precede filing any formal complaint , and filing such complaints should be considered when informal resolution seems inappropriate or would violate confidentiality rights or after collegial discussion has failed to resolve the matter of concern . even with such clear directives to follow , however , ethical issues arising in forensic psychology practice may evoke respectable differences of opinion that call for some exercise of judgment , as in the next case . case one . upon printing his own computer based narrative from the examining psychologist test data , the reviewer confirmed that this examiner had indeed cribbed long sections of his report from the computer narrative without acknowledging their source . moreover , he discovered that a not in the computer narrative had been omitted from the examining psychologist written report at a critical point in the text where it would have reversed negative conclusions in the report about the father suitability as a parent . the reviewing psychologist testified to this effect in court , with the computer generated report and the examining psychologist written report in evidence . the court concluded that the examining psychologist had misrepresented his findings and altered his report to please the attorney who had retained him . news of this outcome subsequently circulated among the local community of attorneys and psychologists working in family law cases . although the ethical transgression was clear in the preceding case , the sequence of events raises some procedural questions . to begin with , an informal collegial discussion of the matters of concern , prescribed in the ethics code as the first step in dealing with a suspected or potential ethical violation , was not an option in this instance , because the violation had already been written into a signed and discoverable document . only in emergency situations , when other qualified help is not available , should they act beyond the boundaries of their competence . psychologists are further instructed by the competence standard to maintain their competence , which speaks to the importance of continuing education ; to base their work on established scientific and professional knowledge in their discipline ; and to prevent personal problems and conflicts from interfering with adequate performance of their work related duties . in addition to the numerous implications of these requirements for forensic practice , the competence standard specifies that psychologists serving in forensic roles should be reasonably familiar with judicial and administrative rules governing these roles . no psychologist can be adequately educated for every exigency , however , and determining whether competent service is being provided may at times involve some degree of judgment . the next case illustrates effective preparation for a forensic consultation and appropriate candor about professional competencies . case two . a psychologist was asked to analyze some insurance policies for their readability levels . he was experienced in assessing intellectual functioning , but his familiarity with readability analysis and insurance policies was limited . he related his background and skills to the lawyer who wanted to retain him and clarified the nature of the services he was being asked to provide . he then consulted with two colleagues who regularly assessed readability level and reviewed some publications recommended by them . in addition to paralleling many of the ethics code specifications concerning competence , the forensic specialty guidelines stress acquiring and maintaining not only knowledge but relevant skills as well and becoming knowledgeable not only about the legal system but also about the legal rights of individuals . these guidelines further admonish forensic psychologists to : give full and accurate accounts of both their skills and their knowledge when presenting themselves to clients . base their opinions and testimony as much as possible on scientific foundations . clarify the limits of their conclusions and recommendations as well as the factual basis for them . keep abreast of developments in the law as well as in psychology . ensure that their own values do not compromise the services they are rendering . the child custody , parenting coordination , and child protection guidelines supplement the ethics code by defining competence in these areas of endeavor to include having a thorough understanding of child and family development and psychopathology , being familiar with what is known about the impact of divorce on children , and keeping current with the child custody literature . as attested by this specification in the child custody guidelines , the competence of forensic psychologists is unlikely to be uniform across criminal , civil , and family law proceedings . without having evaluated barefoot , grigson claimed that he could predict future dangerousness of an individual within reasonable medical certainty , that barefoot was in the most severe category of sociopaths , and that he was one hundred percent and absolutely barefoot would commit future acts of violence that would constitute a continuing threat to society . cross examination has been the mechanism traditionally used by the courts to challenge or dismiss such outlandish claims . however , cross examination is often inadequate in this regard , because it relies on attorneys , judges , and jurors to make determinations concerning technical matters that are known only by other experts in the area . as a partial solution to this problem , golding suggested placing an affirmative duty on potential experts to clarify the basis of their testimony , to show the evidence of the specific bases of their conclusions , and to describe the limits of their testimony , all of which would be consistent with the ethics code and forensic specialty guidelines . unfortunately , this suggestion would still leave it in the hands of attorneys to conduct telling cross examinations on technicalities of psychology , which they may not be equipped to do . this type of practice , like testifying about the psychological characteristics of a person who has not been examined , violates the ethics code except in special circumstances , such as providing a record review concerning someone who is not available to be examined ; as a further example of questionable procedure , consider the courtroom performance of the two psychologists testifying in the next case . case three . in a murder trial involving an insanity defense , a psychologist retained by the defense attorney testified that impairments associated with borderline personality disorder had caused the defendant lifelong adjustment problems , including mood fluctuations , excessive anger , and poor emotional control . this disorder , the defense psychologist said , had prevented the defendant from conforming his conduct to the law and distinguishing right from wrong when he stabbed to death a seventy four year old woman and her four year old granddaughter . did these criteria , like the laws in most states , disallow personality disorders from consideration as a valid insanity defense ? did these psychologists employ adequate methods to assist them in reaching their conclusions ? did the defendant claim of hearing voices raise some doubt about the accuracy of a borderline personality disorder diagnosis ? did one or both of the psychologists have an adequate foundation for their testimony , and did they articulate their findings in a manner consistent with the standard set forth in the ethics code ? the probable answers to these questions bring into sharp relief the kind of inept courtroom display that can foster public cynicism and mistrust of mental health experts . such incompetence is by definition unethical , and it is unethical conduct in the courtroom , not proper forensic practice , that provides critics of forensic mental health practice with grist for their mill . finally , with respect to competent practice , forensic psychologists should recognize and express clearly the certainty of their opinions and conclusions . in jury selection , for example , a consulting psychologist who can assess a potential juror opinions regarding the issue at trial may have little way of knowing how this person might be influenced by the leadership style of the jury foreperson and the group dynamics among the jurors when they assemble in the jury room . in practice , this circumstance means that forensic consultants are likely to be more helpful in juror selection than they can be in jury selection . because of the uncertainty inherent in many of the conclusions they form , forensic psychologists are well advised to work with a graded system of levels of confidence in their conclusions . in the instance of an insanity defense , for example , the law provides clear criteria that can readily be translated into well researched psychological characteristics for which clinical research and assessment methods are abundant . in custody cases , by contrast , statutory law provides little in the way of specified criteria for being a suitable parent . forensic psychologists are further well advised to discuss with attorneys who retain them not only the certainty of the knowledge base relevant to their case but also the certainty of the findings they obtain in the particular case and can testify to . even the most sensitive measurement methods may not reveal relevant information in a particular instance , and psychologists should say as much in such cases . competent forensic practitioners take responsibility for describing the weight of the evidence on which their testimony is based , and , even in the absence of a compelling level of certainty , the court may ask for expert guidance , as in the next statement from the bench . it is , of course , not easy to predict future behavior . included in the several sections of the standard are proscriptions against discriminating against , harassing , or exploiting others and guidelines for not becoming involved in multiple relationships and conflicts of interest . forensic activities often put psychologists in situations fraught with risk for being drawn into multiple relationships and conflicts of interest , and the forensic specialty guidelines spell out numerous precautions that practitioners should take in this regard . the guidelines have in turn been supplemented by substantial attention in the literature to the boundaries of and exceptions to multiple relationships . case four . a psychologist conducting a defendant competence to stand trial evaluation found reasonably clear evidence that the defendant was intellectually disabled . he informed the defendant that he would be saying some things about him in court that might be upsetting to him and make him look bad in the eyes of friends and relatives who were present but that he should not take these comments as a personal criticism . he then told the defendant what the result of intellectual testing indicated , but he added that there were many different ways of defining and measuring intelligence and that these test results did not say anything about whether he was a good or bad person . this sensitivity on the psychologist part fostered mutual respect between him and the defendant and gave the defendant a frame of reference that eased the distress of hearing his limited tested intelligence reported in the courtroom . standard four concerns the responsibility of psychologists to respect and protect the privacy of the people to whom or for whom they provide professional services . the forensic specialty guidelines clarify that this requirement pertains both to clients being evaluated and to retaining parties who request a forensic psychological consultation . because of the extent to which forensic psychologists are charged with unearthing and reporting sensitive findings , issues of privacy and confidentiality can become particularly complex and challenging in their practice . over one third of their respondents reported being uncertain about whether it is ethical to use email to provide professional services , contact clients about payment or insurance issues , and send confidential information to other healthcare professionals , and more than one third were uncertain about the ethicality of using instant messaging to provide consultation and supervision , either by computer or cell phone . these survey findings speak to the point made throughout this chapter that ethical right and wrong sometimes hinges on relative rather than absolute judgments , and indefinite circumstances can allow for respectable differences of opinion concerning proper conduct . the following case , however , illustrates a confidentiality requirement that is unequivocal with respect to what must be done the presence of a nondisclosure agreement . case five . an attorney asked the psychologist to assess the extent of psychological damage in a thirty twoyearold woman who had been sexually assaulted by an appliance repairman . the woman attorney reviewed these findings with the company ethics officer , following which the psychologist was paid for his efforts but received no further information about the outcome of the case . he inferred from this sequence of events that the company , faced with the compelling evidence of damage and its proximate causes , had made an out of court settlement with the victim and that the settlement included a nondisclosure agreement . the point of this case example with respect to disclosure and privacy is that , with a nondisclosure agreement in place , any use of the case that contained identifying information could void the settlement and make the psychologist vulnerable to legal action by the plaintiff , her attorney , and the company . in such circumstances , everyone working with the psychologist on a case , including secretaries and technicians with access to information about it , is similarly bound by the privilege rights of the attorney client and civilly liable for any breach of privacy . similarly , most forensic practitioners will find it to their advantage to present a continuing education workshop for attorneys . local and state bar associations usually welcome such offerings by psychologists , although psychologists need to be modest in what they promise to provide and not guarantee any beneficial outcomes of participating in their workshop . the forensic specialty guidelines do not speak to advertising , but they do include a section that elaborates several forensically relevant considerations in making professional and public statements . the text of standard six in the ethics code obliges psychologists to facilitate the services they provide by documenting their work with adequate case records and making these records available to other professionals , as appropriate and within the constraints of confidentiality . the ethics code does not specify the length of time that case records should be kept , but psychologists should be aware of applicable regulations in this regard in the states in which they practice . in florida , for example , statutory law requires licensed psychologists to retain complete psychological records for each service user for a minimum of three years and either the complete records or a summary of them for an additional four years . the apa provides some additional nonmandatory guidelines to assist practitioners in managing their records in the individual case , and the specialty guidelines provide further specific direction in this regard . forensic psychologists should charge for their services on an hourly basis at a prearranged rate or at a prearranged amount for providing particular services . they should never charge on a contingency basis that depends on the outcome of a case . charging on a contingency basis in a personal injury litigation when retained by the plaintiff attorney can mean that the larger the settlement , the more the psychologist gets paid . it can also mean not getting paid at all , should the defendant prevail in the case . operating in such contingency circumstances makes the psychologist an interested party with a clear conflict of interest who can not be expected to provide objective and unbiased testimony . the standard on education and training holds psychologists responsible for designing appropriate experiences and providing appropriate knowledge to accomplish the goals of any program in which they participate . nevertheless , psychology students can become involved in court proceedings , and their involvement can at times become an ethical minefield , with life and death consequences , as in the next case . case six . a university professor offered his clinical psychology graduate students to the district attorney office to evaluate defendants , which gave the students valuable but unpaid experience and saved the prosecutor office thousands of dollars . in a case in which a mother was accused of killing her four year old daughter , tests administered by one of these students were reported by the media as likely to help seal a first degree murder conviction . the prosecutor office claimed ignorance of students having been sent alone to conduct evaluations on first degree murder cases . nevertheless , as a result of this incident , eight other first degree murder cases came under review , with one defense attorney claiming that the psychological testing had been critical in her client accepting a guilty plea instead of proceeding with a jury trial , and the prosecutor office discontinued its use of student examiners . as for the professor , he said subsequently that it was all a misunderstanding and that the student had become flustered during her deposition and made some misleading statements . however , he did not dispute the production of an altered mmpi two answer sheet . the ethical misconduct in this case requires no further comment . with regard to publishing , the standard calls for giving appropriate credit for authorship , and it specifically proscribes plagiarism and the fabrication of data . this standard is fully applicable to the scholarly work of forensic psychologists , whose research efforts may also present some specialty specific ethical issues , particularly if they are collecting data within prison walls . for example , can informed consent be given by incarcerated research participants who as prisoners may not be operating under their own free will ? might some of the requested research information compromise the rights of participants by being tantamount to their testifying against themselves ? case seven . a prominent forensic psychologist was presenting a paper at the annual apa convention on ethical considerations in serving as an expert witness . he emphasized the importance of practicing at the highest standards of empiricism , and he illustrated shortcomings in this regard by referring to a testing procedure developed by a wellknown psychologist . he assailed the procedure lack of reliability and validity and called its use improper . a few minutes into this harangue , a man in the audience rose and introduced himself as the psychologist being vilified . he then listed studies in several prominent journals that documented the psychometric soundness of his procedure and asked the presenter if he had read these studies . the presenter , sweating profusely , mumbled something inaudible and sat down without finishing his talk . the lesson in this case is that public presenters should speak as if anyone about whom they will be speaking , especially if in critical fashion , were in the room . comments that could not in good conscience be voiced in the presence of a professional colleague whose work is being criticized should not be voiced at all . unlike the presenter in this case , moreover , a principled forensic psychologist would not impugn another psychologist work without having conducted a thorough search of the literature concerning it . the assessment standard in the ethics code has substantial implications for the practice of forensic psychology , because assessment constitutes a considerable part of what forensic psychologists do . first , psychologists should offer opinions only about persons they have examined , except when the person is not available for examination or when only a consultation or record review is necessary . second , assessments should be conducted with reliable and valid methods that are appropriate for the purpose of the examination . third , informed consent must be obtained from the person to be examined , unless the examination is mandated by law or is a routine part of an activity in which the person is a voluntary participant , such as preemployment screening . six other sections of this standard delineate considerations related to test construction , interpreting and explaining test results , releasing test data , maintaining the security of test materials , and using test scoring and interpretation services . these considerations include : focusing assessments on the legally relevant factors in each individual case . recognizing individual differences that could result in the same test finding having different implications for people from different ethnic or sociocultural backgrounds . providing the appropriate kind and amount of feedback to examinees in legal proceedings . most practitioners would consider it appropriate to accept an attorney request to help coach a person in giving testimony , as in instructing a defendant to sit up straight and establish eye contact with the judge , prosecutor , and jurors . to the extent that slouching and looking down at the floor might send cues that the defendant was guilty or being untruthful , irrespective of the evidence , a psychologist coaching avoidance of these behaviors might well be serving the purposes of justice . however , what if an attorney representing a client in a personal injury or a disability determination case asks the psychologist to coach this client on how to appear impaired on measures of neuropsychological functioning ? most psychologists would deem this type of coaching unethical , and coaching a person in how to answer certain kinds of questions and perform certain kinds of tasks has in fact been demonstrated to produce misleading results in neuropsychological and competency examinations . the therapy standard deals mainly with restrictions on sexual intimacies between psychologists and their current or former psychotherapy patients and these patients significant others . for forensic psychologists providing psychotherapy to litigants , there is an inherent conflict between their obligation to protect a patient privilege and the customary expectation that they will be disclosing pertinent information to officers of the court and other appropriately designated individuals . whereas forensic practitioners conducting assessments rarely have difficulty identifying the person or entity requesting the evaluation as their client , and not the person being evaluated , deciding who the client is may not come so easily when they are functioning as psychotherapists , particularly when they are working in correctional settings or with parents involved in a custody dispute . with respect to working in a correctional setting , consider the dilemma of the psychologist in the following case . case eight . he could report what the inmate had told him , thereby sacrificing his trustworthiness as someone in whom the inmate could confide , or he could keep the inmate secret , thereby endangering the drugfree status of the inmate and his wardmates and colluding with him in a violation of prison rules . as in this case , ethical dilemmas rarely have a simple and entirely comfortable solution . possible harm could be done by making either of the choices listed , but perhaps more harm would ensue to more people from allowing the cocaine to remain on the ward than from losing the inmate trust in his therapist , however much the psychologist would regret having to make this choice . ofttimes the best solution to a dilemma is avoiding it in the first place , whenever possible . there would have been a regrettable choice but not a difficult one in case eight if the psychologist had initially presented a clear statement of the roles and obligations of both parties to the treatment . if the psychologist in this case had stated during the first treatment session that he would be obliged to report any violation of prison rules , there would have been no dilemma . although he might have regretted having to sacrifice a confiding treatment relationship , his honesty and dependability in reporting the violation , just as he had said he would , might have sustained rather than undermined the inmate trust in him . case nine . a prison psychologist was assigned by the department of corrections to conduct sex offender group psychotherapy , the purpose of which was to facilitate the offenders successful adjustment upon returning to the community . a potential ethical dilemma lurking in this assignment concerned the group members privacy rights beyond reporting their progress toward being considered for parole . the psychologist clarified to the group members at the outset that their general progress and risk of reoffending , which would include their compliance with prison rules , would be reported to the prison authorities , but other specific information they discussed in the group would be kept confidential . concurrently , the psychologist made it clear to the authorities that content of the group sessions unrelated to general progress and risk of reoffending would not be forwarded and that privileged communication would remain in effect except for the general progress report . usually , however , the confidentiality issue for therapists treating antagonistic parents is more murky than clear , and sometimes , as in the following case , even appropriate efforts to establish protective agreements can go for naught . case ten . a psychologist anticipated possible ethical conflict between his providing marital therapy and being called to testify in a bitter divorce and custody battle . he had been asked by an attorney whose marriage was dissolving to counsel his wife and himself , in hopes that , for the sake of their young son , they could find a way to salvage their marriage . the psychologist agreed to work with them on the condition that whatever emerged during the marital therapy would not be accessible for inclusion in any subsequent legal proceedings . unfortunately , the marital problems proved refractory to the treatment , and two months following termination of the therapy , the attorney informed the psychologist that he was going to be subpoenaed as a witness to attest to his wife emotional instability . the psychologist reminded him of the pretreatment agreement , to which the attorney replied that this agreement carried no legal authority and could be revoked without consequence . the psychologist dealt with this impasse by letting the attorney lawyer know that , if called to testify , he would report to the court the husband violation of the pretreatment condition and appeal to the judge that the wife had not waived privilege . if the wife were to waive privilege , the psychologist continued , neither party would be happy with the testimony he would then give in describing his impressions of both of them . the attorney lawyer decided that it would be best to forgo calling the psychologist as a witness . sensible practice and case law do not preclude attorneys calling a psychotherapist as a fact witness . however , attorneys usually have no difficulty appreciating that privileged communication is essential for psychological treatment to be effective and that privacy calls for separating the therapist role from the expert witness role . nevertheless , to serve their own purposes , attorneys may press a fact witness psychotherapist for expert testimony . the first of these concerns the obligation of practitioners to prevent their personal values from affecting their professional conduct . the second aspect concerns the professional responsibility of forensic psychologists to resist expectations or demands of attorneys that , although falling within the law , run counter to psychology ethical principles and standards . the ethics code calls on psychologists to be cognizant of how their values as well as their limitations might affect their work . forensic practitioners must be conscientious not only in presenting the factual bases of their opinions and their level of certainty about their inferences but also by being sensitive to the possible impact of their personal needs and beliefs on their interpretation of the data . however , it is one thing for psychologists to accept a case involving issues about which they have some opinion but nevertheless strive to remain objective and neutral in their work on the case ; it is quite something else for psychologists to seek out forensic opportunities in order to promote certain causes or advance some sociopolitical agenda , in which case their neutrality and objectivity would most certainly be suspect . as suggested by hess , experts should ask themselves several questions before committing to participate in a case in which their values might cloud their judgment : would they be using the expert role to provide objective expertise or to exercise moral advocacy ? are they qualified by knowledge , skills , education , experience , or training to provide information that will be helpful to the fact finders in the case ? will their involvement in the case be probative or prejudicial ? to what extent will the adversarial nature of the legal system distort the implications of whatever evidence they provide ? hence the ethical concern is not whether psychologists serving in expert roles have values but whether these values constitute a dedicated purpose that compromises the objectivity and neutrality they bring to their evaluations and testimony in certain cases . suppose , for example , that a male psychologist loses custody of his own child and subsequently becomes determined that no other father should lose custody of his child . forensic psychologists are entitled to their personal beliefs , including a conviction that fathers should always be awarded custody . however , proper platforms for promoting such causes might include a presentation to a legislative body or participation in a sociopolitical action group , but they do not include testifying as an expert witness . forensic practitioners who pursue a personal agenda or moral cause when objective opinion is expected and neutrality is required transgress ethical standards and invite malpractice claims . forensic psychologists should limit their expert witness involvement to cases in which they will have no difficulty suspending motivation to impose their own values , and they should neither seek nor accept professional opportunities to espouse partisan positions in the courtroom . this adversarial stance may define how some attorneys view their experts as well as their clients , in which case forensic psychologists must take care to avoid such consequent problems as inappropriate agency , multiple relationships , geographical intrusion , and misused expertise . inappropriate agency in forensic practice derives from the fact that lawyers are agents for their clients and are committed to working for their benefit . as one problematic consequence of this adversarial posture , attorneys may regard forensic psychologists they retain as likewise being agents for their clients who will advocate along with them on their behalf and share their commitment to winning their cases . except when forensic psychologists have been retained as consultants to provide behind the scenes advice on case management , rather than as expert witnesses , they must resist being inappropriately cast as agents for the attorney client . nor are forensic psychologists agents of the attorney who retains them , and they are no more responsible for serving the attorney best interests than they are for serving the best interests of the attorney client . forensic psychologists have no professional obligations to the parties in a case other than to conduct a competent evaluation and report their findings clearly , accurately , and honestly , whatever these findings may be , and independently of any motivation to win or lose . fisher argues in this regard that identifying who should and should not be considered the forensic psychologist client in a case is less important than having a clear sense of the practitioner ethical responsibilities to each of the parties in the case . however it might be defined , avoiding inappropriate agency and thus remaining free of an adversarial posture is an essential element of complying with the ethics code . if an examining psychologist findings appear to strengthen a retaining attorney case , all well and good ; should the findings seem likely to undermine the attorney chances of winning a case , this eventuality should be construed as the lawyer problem , not the psychologist problem , as in the following case . case eleven . to the contrary , the obtained data painted a picture of a psychologically resourceful woman with many personality strengths and above average capacity to deal with stressful situations without becoming unduly upset by them . the psychologist informed the retaining attorney that the results of the examination were likely to work against his client case . acting in accord with allowable adversarial procedures , the attorney declined to have a report written and did not identify the psychologist as an expert witness in the case , thereby shielding the psychologist information from discovery . to the psychologist surprise , however , the attorney thanked him for these seemingly unhelpful results . he had suspected some exaggeration on his client part and now had some dependable basis for attempting to persuade her to drop or at least reduce her claims , which would make it less difficult for him to represent her . should practitioners be required by law , institutional policy , or external circumstances to serve in more than one role in a judicial or administrative proceeding , the guidelines recommend explaining the potential drawbacks of such multiple relationships and striving to minimize any negative consequences of the particular circumstance . as for geographical intrusion , lawyers are ordinarily free to bring both fact and expert witnesses into court from wherever they reside . psychologists are likewise free to give testimony wherever they are called upon to do so . however , should a forensic consultation involve conducting an evaluation or engaging in other activities that constitute practicing psychology , the provision of such services in a state in which one is not licensed is a geographical intrusion that can evoke ethical complaints or legal action . as reported by goodstein , eleven states allow no practice at all by psychologists who are not licensed in their state ; twenty three states allow some practice by out of state psychologists , but only after prior approval by the state licensing board ; and most states that allow interstate practice with or without prior misused expertise is a regrettable turn of events that can occur as a consequence of attorneys being accustomed to an adversarial system in which everyone is entitled to a defense . psychologists may respect this tenet of the law , but they are not professionally bound by it , nor are they obliged to assist in a defense when it seems inadvisable or improper for them to do so . whereas lawyers may be assigned by the court or their firm to construct the best possible defense of a client , no matter how weak the case , forensic psychologists are ordinarily free to accept or decline requests to serve as an expert witness , as they see fit . testifying as an expert when psychological knowledge has little bearing on the issues in a case or , worse yet , when a manufactured defense borders on the psychologically absurd , can be damaging to a forensic psychologist reputation and reflect poorly on the profession . the practitioner in the following situation showed professional responsibility by declining to become involved in two cases that he anticipated could damage his reputation and the respectability of forensic psychology . case twelve . a psychologist received separate calls from two attorneys in a firm to which he had been recommended as a consultant . one of the attorneys wanted help with defending a student who had been caught cheating by copying answers from other students examinations . the attorney had theorized that the cheater could not refrain from scanning his environment in search of answers due to an innate tendency that caused his eyes to wander . he sought to entice the psychologist participation by offering to work with him in developing this theory and going public with a wandering eyes syndrome that could bring both of them some degree of fame and fortune . preferring to preserve his reputation and reserve his testimony for cases in which his expertise would be used responsibly , he passed on the opportunity to participate in these cases . a few final words summarize the essentials of practicing principled forensic psychology in ways that minimize practitioners vulnerability to ethical complaints and legal actions . be conversant with the terminology , concepts , practices , and standards common in the legal community , and be acquainted with the regulations , statutes , and required or customary procedures pertaining to work in states in which the practitioner is licensed or permitted to practice . prepare accurate and sufficiently detailed records , store them securely , and retain them for at least the length of time specified by state requirements . be mindful of the forensic psychologist appropriate roles in a case , which may differ from what attorneys and attorneys clients expect them to do , and be sensitive to conflicts of interest and other circumstances that could compromise principled practice . conducting child custody and parenting evaluations . in the past thirty years , there has been a steady growth in the use of psychologists and other mental health professionals in child custody matters . finally , evaluators need to have a thorough understanding of the ethical issues that surface when undertaking these complex evaluations for families and the courts . these evaluations are time and cost intensive and potentially intrusive to the family , and they risk putting the children in the middle of their parents conflicts . when ordered by the court to participate in an evaluation , parents are subjected to multiple interviews , perhaps psychological testing , and exposure of their conflicts to teachers , therapists , and other professionals . the changing nature of a child developmental or psychological needs relative to future timesharing plans . the expansive nature of individual questions a court may have about a particular family . in addition to these complexities , child custody evaluators must have knowledge of relevant statutes and case law . the model standards of practice for child custody evaluation state that evaluators should be knowledgeable about the legal and professional standards , laws , and rules applicable to the jurisdiction in which the evaluation is requested . the goal of the guidelines for child custody evaluations is to promote proficiency in the conduct of these particular evaluations , and the purpose of the evaluation is to assist in determining the psychological best interests of the child . ultimately , the purpose of custody and parenting evaluations is to do all of these things . the evaluation process is associated with a dramatically increased risk of licensing complaints against the evaluator and is often stressful for the examiner . because serious allegations are common to the types of cases that fail at mediation and other attempts at settlement , the evaluator recommendations can have particularly significant ramifications for the child future . although this chapter can not address all of the issues relevant to child custody and parenting evaluations , it focuses on these issues : the best interests of the child standard . in nearly all fifty states and in most western countries , laws related to the best interests of the child guide decisions about child custody and parenting plans . few states define the term best interests of the child , although many identify specific factors that judges are to consider when making decisions about a child best interests , leading some commentators to argue that the best interests standard is not defined . indeed , judges are afforded great latitude to order a parenting plan that they decide is in the child best interests . in arizona , for example , several best interests factors call for psychological data to be gathered . they include : the wishes of the child as to custodian . the interaction and interrelationship of the child with the child parent or parents , the child siblings , and any other person who may significantly affect the child best interests . the child adjustment to home , school , and community . which parent is more likely to allow the child frequent and meaningful continuing contact with the other parent . whether one parent , both parents , or neither parent has provided primary care of the child . garbolino suggested that the factors likely to be of importance to the wellbeing of children vary across families and need to be weighed with discretion . regardless of whether a state has specific factors delineated in its best interests statute or whether there is a presumption associated with a particular factor , the ultimate decision about weighting of these factors is unique to each family and is left to judicial discretion . when completing an evaluation of a given family , the evaluator task is to provide a rationale as to why different factors might be more or less relevant with that particular family . this rationale , of course , will be reflected in the analysis of the data gathered and in the recommendations provided to the court . in a mobile society , one parent may wish to relocate with the children for a variety of reasons , such as employment , economics , family support , or a new relationship . judges may order a child custody evaluation to address the relevant psychological factors associated with the relocation question . for example , in california , judges frequently request the assistance of an evaluator in a relocation case in order to provide information to the court about the relevant psychological issues described in the lamusga decision . among the many issues identified in the case were various factors the court would likely consider in a relocation matter . this guidance from case law also helps custody evaluators in california focus on those relevant psychological issues . these parents agree on important decisions about their children , such as where they will go to school , what extracurricular activities they will participate in , and what nonemergency medical procedures to consider . they agree on a parenting plan that will delineate the times their children spend with each parent . obviously , these families do not need to undergo an evaluation , nor would the court order one . in fact , given the potentially intrusive nature of child custody evaluations , in such situations it is highly likely that an evaluation would be harmful to the family . a neutrally appointed child custody evaluator will spend considerable time with both parents trying to understand their concerns and their perceptions of their child needs . this can be comforting to parents and sometimes serves as a catalyst for them to move toward cooperation . in these ways , the evaluator serves to hear the child voice and advocate for the child psychological and developmental needs . a third potential benefit comes from the fact that the same mental health professional is observing all family members . in the midst of an acrimonious divorce , services are often fragmented , with each parent having his or her own therapist and attorney whose role is to advocate for their respective client . these professionals do not have critical information about the other family members and are not neutral with regard to the family . although their advice might be helpful and appropriate to their clients , their perspectives and recommendations may not be in the child best interests . at the end of the evaluation process , when an evaluator writes a comprehensive report , parents benefit by learning about their child needs and how they can work together to meet those needs . the report can help parents focus on the child rather than on their conflicts with each other and can help them learn ways to resolve their conflicts and meet their child needs . furthermore , the evaluator can help parents understand relevant issues important to parents , such as when and how to incorporate overnight time with each parent for their young child , the impact of their conflict on their children , and the risks and benefits of shared parenting . this understanding will enable them to parent more effectively . ethical considerations in child custody evaluations . along with any state or local court rules or statutes , and in addition to the afcc model standards and the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations described earlier , a number of other advisory documents guide the ethical practice of the child custody evaluator , including : ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct . applying psychology to civil proceedings . eppcc standard two states , psychologists provide services . with populations and in areas only within the boundaries of their competence , based on their education , training , supervised experience , consultation , study , or professional experience . the effects of separation , divorce , domestic violence , substance abuse , child alienation , child maltreatment , and interparental conflict on the psychological and developmental needs of children . how to assess parenting capacity and coparenting capacity and construct effective parenting and coparenting plans . additionally , the specialty guidelines state , forensic practitioners make ongoing efforts to develop and maintain their competencies . keep abreast of developments in the fields of psychology and law . these several documents guide the evaluator in developing and maintaining ongoing continuing education in areas relevant to child custody evaluations . avoiding conflicts of interest . furthermore , the guidelines for child custody evaluations advise against performing a child custody evaluation if the psychologist has provided therapeutic services to any of the parties in the past or present . evaluators may also consider disclosure of other preexisting professional roles with any family member such as having been the mediator ; personal relationships , such as having one child on the same little league team as the children in the family to be evaluated ; or even a close relationship with one of the attorneys before accepting an appointment . if such a parent later finds out about these relationships , it may serve as further reinforcement of such bias in the mind of the parent . advance disclosure of all prior relationships helps reduce the risk of such allegations . obtaining informed consent . even though child custody evaluations typically are court ordered , parents still need to understand the process . technically , informed consent is not obtained when the court orders an evaluation ; instead , custody evaluators are encouraged to obtain informed consent both in writing and orally at the start of the evaluation process . the document needs to explain critical issues , such as the general procedures that will be used , each parent role in the evaluation process , fees , and the limits of confidentiality . the evaluator needs to inform parents that a child custody evaluation is not a health related procedure and that the evaluator will not bill a parent health insurance . employing balanced and impartial procedures . according to afcc model standard five , child custody evaluators strive to use a balanced process in order to achieve objectivity , fairness , and independence : as one element of a balanced process , the evaluative criteria employed shall be the same for each parent child combination . in the interests of fairness and sound methodology , evaluators shall ensure that any allegation concerning a matter that the evaluator is likely to consider in formulating his opinion shall be brought to the attention of the party against whom the allegation is registered so that he is afforded an opportunity to respond . when the evaluator does not act in this way , it almost assuredly leads to a complaint of bias , sometimes made to the parent attorney , but potentially to the court or practitioner licensing board . using multiple sources of information . interviews with children when appropriate . observations of children and parents interacting , in formulating her opinion shall be brought to the attention of the party against whom the allegation is registered so that he is afforded an opportunity to respond . when the evaluator does not act in this way , it almost assuredly leads to a complaint of bias , sometimes made to the parent attorney , but potentially to the court or practitioner licensing board . using multiple sources of information . according to guideline ten of the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations , multiple methods of data gathering enhance the reliability and validity of psychologists eventual conclusions , opinions , and recommendations . administration of psychological testing and parenting questionnaires . review of collateral documents . interviews with relevant professionals , family members , and friends . staying within the scope of the evaluation . guideline eight of the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations states : before agreeing to conduct a child custody evaluation , psychologists seek when necessary to clarify the referral question and to determine whether they are potentially able to provide opinions or recommendations . if issues not foreseen at the outset of the evaluation arise and if it is the evaluator professional judgment that the scope of the evaluation must be widened , the evaluator shall seek the approval of the court or all attorneys prior to going beyond the originally designated scope of the evaluation . both of these require that the evaluator carefully consider the relevant issues in the case and make recommendations consistent with those issues . identifying the scope in advance of performing the evaluation also ensures that the evaluator has the necessary specialized training to conduct the evaluation , as noted earlier . differentiating observations , inferences , and conclusions . in the specialty guidelines , psychologists are reminded : in their communications , forensic practitioners strive to distinguish observations , inferences , and conclusions . forensic practitioners are encouraged to explain the relationship between their expert opinions and the legal issues and facts of the case at hand . additionally , specialty guideline eleven states , forensic practitioners are encouraged to disclose all sources of information obtained in the course of their professional services , and to identify the source of each piece of information that was considered and relied upon in formulating a particular conclusion opinion . ultimately , this guideline is to help parents understand the rationale for recommendations but also to assist the court in understanding the evaluator reasoning . record keeping . because records are subject to subpoena and full disclosure is important in the interest of transparency and due process , the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations direct evaluators to keep complete , readable records with the expectation that others will review them in the event of ongoing litigation after the completion of the report : legal and ethical standards describe requirements for the appropriate development , maintenance , and disposal of professional records . the court expects psychologists providing child custody evaluations to preserve the data that inform their conclusions . this enables other professionals to analyze , understand , and provide appropriate support for psychologists forensic opinions . basic critical and relevant research , especially about children . global findings include that there is an increased risk of harm to children when their parents divorce and that most of the harm comes from the children exposure to poverty , conflict , limited access to one of their parents , and poor parenting . research also demonstrates that children are resilient and that the majority suffer no significant negative long term effects as a result of the separation or divorce of their parents . the term parenting plans refers to both the legal custody and physical custody of children . legal custody refers to who has the authority to make important decisions about the children , whereas physical custody refers to where the children reside . some states , however , have changed statutory language and no longer use terms such as legal custody , physical custody , and visitation . in those states , statutory language refers to the child residential schedule and parents decision making . this section of the chapter focuses on the residential schedule identified in parenting plans . kelly and lamb were the first to identify the importance of regular overnight visits between very young children and their parents . this article led to some controversy , and in recent years , it has again been suggested that overnight visits may be harmful for some children . gould and stahl provided a framework in which to consider risks and benefits associated with overnight visits . most recently , ludolph and dale surveyed the attachment , fathering , and divorce research and concluded that , although attachment is one factor to consider when designing parenting plans for young children , other factors , including the history and nature of father involvement , quality of parenting by each parent , extent and type of conflict between the parents , regular day care that might be provided by third parties , and logistics , are relevant as well . in most circumstances , parents will share in the legal custody and decision making for their children , but there will be times when this is not feasible . typically , in families experiencing coercive controlling violence , in situations where mental illness and substance abuse impairs parenting , illness or substance abuse impairs parenting , and in those families in which parents dislike each other more than they love their children , it may be necessary to have decision making vested in one parent . this process helps many families avoid frequent returns to court and enables decisions to be made for the benefit of children more efficiently . critical research in special issues . in addition to the basic research just described , many child custody evaluations involve special issues , including allegations of domestic violence , sexual abuse , children becoming alienated , and relocation . even more specialized knowledge is critical when performing evaluations in these areas . alienated children . kelly and johnston discussed the alienated child and identified a range of factors that result in children becoming alienated from a parent . drozd and olesen took this is a step further when identifying the differences between children who are realistically estranged from one parent and those who have developed an unjustified alienation in rejecting that parent . for many years , the domestic violence literature focused primarily on what has been termed intimate partner violence , and the child custody evaluation literature focused on risk assessments with these families . however , not all domestic violence involves the use of power and control as a primary dynamic such as is found in coercive controlling violence . in two thousand and seven , the afcc and the national council of juvenile and family court judges convened a symposium to discuss the differentiation of domestic violence cases and develop a recognition that one size does not fit all . in these cases , after violence occurs , parents are ashamed of their actions , readily admit to what they have done , and vow never again to engage in violent or abusive behavior . in other families , parents experience situational couples violence , in which neither parent is afraid of the other , both initiate the violence , and there is no evidence of power and control being utilized by either parent . in perhaps the smallest subset of families , but in the most serious of situations , the violence appears to be coercive and controlling in nature . in these coercive controlling violence families , it is most common for males to aggress , the victim and children are fearful in response to physical violence , and there is often cooccurring emotional abuse , sexual abuse , or control of family economics . sexual abuse . perhaps the most emotionally charged of cases are those in which there are allegations of child sexual abuse . the challenge in these cases is that the allegation usually sets in motion several events , including but not limited to : independent investigations by child protective services and law enforcement authorities . criminal charges . a temporary order suspending or supervising contact between the child and the alleged offender . emotionally charged court hearings in which the alleged offender denies the allegations and claims the allegations are made for purposes of custody and the other parent simply claiming protection of the child . a child custody evaluation designed to more fully evaluate the allegations and make recommendations for a parenting plan . kuehnle and connell focus on the range of hypotheses that must be considered in any case when such allegations are raised and the thoroughness of the evaluation process required . they also identify that the primary role of the evaluator is to perform a risk assessment in these cases . relocation evaluations . the one area where many judges and evaluators have the most trouble making decisions is in relocation cases , which pit the right of adults to live wherever they want and the right to parent . these cases come to the court when one parent wants to move with the child and the other parent opposes the move and wants the child to remain . child custody evaluators are at risk of confounding the research when performing these evaluations by recommending against moves because of research that demonstrates the benefit to children when both parents maintain ongoing and regular access with their children . there is limited research on the effect of parental relocation on children . college students reported greater current problems when they lived more than one hundred miles from their other parent during their childhood as a result of the relocation of either parent . drawing on other divorce research but in the absence of relocation research , some have suggested courts allow relocation by the primary custodial parent whereas others have suggested that courts should almost routinely order a provisional change of custody to the parent who is not relocating when the primary custodial parent wants to move . stahl has suggested that for the move or against the move biases operate in those circumstances and should not result in either of these presumptions . the primary focus in recent years has been on the consideration of risk and protective factors in determining the ultimate decision in these cases . some factors are likely to increase risks for children if they move . other factors will be protective and minimize risks for children if they move . some children who move are harmed while others are not . parkinson et al . wrote that , while it is tempting to resolve these difficult cases with the assistance of wishful thinking , research is needed to test that wishful thinking against the realities of experience . they do not believe there is ample research support to conclude that children who relocate with one parent while the other parent is left behind will , by virtue of the relocation , automatically do well or will be harmed . rather , the only way to understand the optimal relocation decision in a given case is by focusing on the risk and protective factors existing in that case . process of conducting custody and parenting evaluations . child custody and parenting evaluations are very different from other psychological or forensic evaluations . they are more complex , involve more people , and entail more procedures than most . these evaluations require a forensic mindset versus a therapeutic mindset and the exploration of multiple hypotheses . typically , there will be allegations made by one parent against the other , and it is not unusual for the evaluator to be unable to reach conclusions about the hesaid , shesaid allegations in the case . each step of the evaluation process is designed to help the evaluator gather information critical to understanding the family . this section addresses some of these critical issues . in most jurisdictions , a custody or parenting evaluation will be ordered by the court or stipulated to by the parties . it results in appointment of one neutral evaluator focused on assessing all relevant issues in dispute . from a risk management perspective , it is important to receive the court order before beginning the evaluation , as the authority to conduct the evaluation comes from the court . in many jurisdictions , the court order provides the evaluator with quasijudicial immunity and includes information helpful to determining the scope of the evaluation . after receiving the court order , it is common for the evaluator to have a joint conference call with the attorneys to gather basic information about the family and the reasons for the evaluation . although some attorneys like to argue their case for the evaluator , it is best to get some basic facts and reasons for the evaluation during this call and lay out the logistics and proposed time frame for the evaluation . during this call , it is helpful for the evaluator to explain procedures and request documents to be reviewed . the next step is scheduling initial appointments with the parents and sending them necessary paperwork , with copies to their attorneys . this paperwork is likely to include the retainer agreement and an intake form . as noted , the retainer agreement describes the evaluator and the parents obligations through the evaluation process , limitations regarding confidentiality , and other critical information about the evaluation process . a good way to start the first evaluation interview with each parent is to ask the parent , why are we here ? this question allows the parent to explain his or her concerns , observations , beliefs , and allegations in a rather open ended manner . with limited prompting , the evaluator can spend much of the first appointment trying to understand the parent issues , concerns , and proposed solutions . in most evaluations , this information can be gathered in three to four interviews , each of which might last two hours . it is important to gather the information that each parent wants to relay , but the examiner must be more than a stenographer and seek enough depth and breadth associated with these issues while simultaneously having an opportunity to ask each parent about the concerns raised by the other parent . in evaluations with more complex issues , the evaluator will want to explore those in depth . in some jurisdictions , there is a presumptive right to move by a custodial parent , whereas in other jurisdictions , the burden is on the parent requesting to relocate to show that the move is in the child best interests . evaluators should : start by establishing rapport with the children . begin by discussing the process of the evaluation , the limits of confidentiality , and the structure of the interview process . encourage children to talk openly about their feelings and help them understand that the evaluation is about their interests and not their parents wishes . inform the children that a report will be submitted to the judge , which the parents will probably read . although children suggestibility and the potential for being influenced by parents or siblings is a topic that is beyond the scope of this chapter , it is critical for those evaluating custody and parenting plans to understand this research . specific data are important to gather during interviews with children . these include the child : likes and dislikes , interests , friends , chosen activities , and other aspects of the child day to day life . schooling , including information about how each parent participates in helping with homework and other school related matters . perceptions of his or her relationships with each parent , including things that the child likes and does not like about each parent . perceptions of discipline . routines in each home and how the child deals with any differences in routines between homes . a fundamental purpose for observing children is to understand the nature of the bond between a child and the parents . although there is no reliable and valid way of measuring whether a child is more bonded to one parent or the other , the job of the evaluator is to describe the behavioral dynamics of the bond for the judge . encouraging a father and daughter to draw a picture , for example , will provide data about how they work together to complete a task . are they cooperative , are they playful , do they use each other assistance , or do they become quite competitive with one another ? this can help the evaluator develop hypotheses about the child relationship with the parent , which will need to be verified in other ways . unstructured play , in which the child initiates an activity of his or her choosing , provides an opportunity to see how responsive the parent is to the child in his or her space . many parents can interact quite well with their children when they choose the activity , but they may feel awkward and insecure when their children choose the activity . use of psychological testing in custody evaluations , although common , is not mandatory . no psychological tests measure the quality of parenting or coparenting , which are critical issues in child custody and parenting evaluations . there are also no valid psychological tests designed for use with the specific child custody population . although there have been efforts to develop some psychological instruments relevant to child custody , these instruments are of limited validity . the most recent effort to develop an instrument to understand children views of their relationships , the structured child assessment of relationships in families , does not have sufficient validity and reliability , although research on this instrument is ongoing . thus , no specific instruments can directly assess the complex issues inherent in these evaluations . the afcc model standards direct child custody evaluators to be prepared to articulate the bases for selecting the specific instruments used and to use assessment instruments for the purpose for which they have been validated . the model standards add that aution should be exercised . when utilizing computer generated interpretive reports and prescriptive texts , interpretive reports or prescriptive texts . according to the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations , psychologists strive to interpret assessment data in a manner consistent with the context of the evaluation . these standards and guidelines suggest that child custody and parenting evaluators must be careful in choosing assessment instruments , understand the research associated with custody litigants and their scores on various measures , and be careful when using computer generated interpretive reports . for example , if test data revealed clinical elevations on a scale that measures psychological turmoil , the evaluator might hypothesize that the parent is reacting to a difficult divorce , and if this hypothesis was confirmed by other data gathered during the evaluation , the impact on parenting might be deemed minimal and temporary . alternatively , it might be hypothesized that the parent has chronic and pervasive deficits in mood regulation , which would pose more serious concerns with respect to parenting and coparenting . the hypotheses generated are evaluated against other data from the evaluation to either confirm or disconfirm those hypotheses . the second type of collateral information comes from third parties who have relevant information about one or more family members . collateral data can include information gathered from friends , relatives , babysitters , teachers , pediatricians , psychotherapists , and others . the child custody evaluator looks for convergent and divergent data between collateral and other data to help in understanding the various allegations and assertions made by the parties . collateral information can be gathered verbally as well as in writing , with the use of questionnaires and letters , or by a review of affidavits or other written statements of the parties . the benefits of gathering collateral information are listed next . evaluators need to have a mindset of disconfirmation rather than confirmation . collateral data may include information about parents and children that can not be obtained through clinical interview , parents or children that can not be obtained through clinical interview , testing , and observation . collateral data can help verify or refute claims made by the parents or others . the afcc model standards provide specific direction for the gathering of collateral data : evaluators shall be mindful of the importance of gathering information from multiple sources in order to thoroughly explore alternative hypotheses concerning issues pertinent to the evaluation . he identified that there are people who are close to the family who will have the richest and most complete information about family members . at the same time , these persons are likely to be the most biased and to take sides in the dispute . in the second , broader circle are professionals such as teachers , day care professionals , pediatricians , and therapists who may have considerable information about the family but only within the narrow areas of knowledge that they experience family members . many of these persons may also be biased in favor of one parent . in the outermost circle are those few people who may know very little about the family but may have very specific information about an event or some particular parent child information . this may include someone at the school who overhears an argument between a parent and the child teacher . evaluators must obtain the consent of the collateral witness to be part of the evaluation process and provide the same information about the limitations to confidentiality to all third party collaterals , some of whom may not want to speak with an evaluator if they know that their comments are going to be included in a report to the court and read by the parents . as stated in the afcc model standards , evaluators shall provide potential collateral informants with written information that shall include an unambiguous statement concerning the lack of confidentiality in a forensic mental health evaluation . applying psychology to civil proceedings . critical issues in report writing . although this rule is mandatory only for california child custody evaluators , these suggestions are useful for evaluators in any jurisdiction . the specialty guidelines state : consistent with relevant law and rules of evidence , when providing professional reports and other sworn statements or testimony , forensic practitioners strive to offer a complete statement of all relevant opinions that they formed within the scope of their work on the case , the basis and reasoning underlying the opinions , the salient data or other information that was considered in forming the opinions , and an indication of any additional evidence that may be used in support of the opinions to be offered . the specific substance of forensic reports is determined by the type of psycholegal issue at hand as well as relevant laws or rules in the jurisdiction in which the work is completed . if there was some reason that procedures were not balanced , this discrepancy should be explained . this thorough description of procedures helps reduce the risk that someone might perceive the evaluation and report as biased . each parent . the evaluator must provide complete and relevant information about each parent . among other things , the data included in this section of the report should include each parent : concerns and allegations . responses to the other parent stated significant concerns . description of the children , the children functioning , and needs . relevant history and psychological functioning . parenting style and strengths and weaknesses . description of the coparenting relationship and each parent contribution to the coparenting difficulties . desired custodial outcome and reasons for that . in addition , this section should include each parent relevant details about any special issues . for example , in a relocation evaluation , it will be important for the evaluator to explain each parent motives for moving or opposing the move , thoughts about how the move might be positive or harmful for the child , and other important relocation related data . opinion about the parenting plan , if expressed . collateral information . the evaluator must present information obtained from collateral sources and indicate whether this information was obtained in writing or verbally . data about why the collateral informant information was included in the data set , the nature and type of relationship the collateral informant has with the parties and children , with the parties or children , and if relevant , the attitude of the collateral informant about participating in the evaluation should be provided . for this reason , it may be useful to review with the collateral informant the information to be included in the report and include a statement from each collateral witness confirming the information in the report , report or include a statement from each collateral witness confirming the information in the report . rather than a review of information already described , the analysis section should focus on those data that lead to the expert opinions . in the analysis section , it is also important to discuss data that may not be consistent with the examiner expert opinions or recommendations . just as in math class , here it is important to show your work and explain the bases for all conclusions . it is important to detail the basis for any expert opinions reached . the analysis section should reflect that the evaluator considered each parent concerns and responses to the other parent concerns . it is important that those data are integrated with the psycholegal issues of concern to the court . given that , in most evaluations , there is a range of custodial options , it is important for the evaluator to provide a thorough riskbenefit analysis of each custodial option and those data that support his or her conclusions . for example , in a typical case , the evaluator should explain the risks and benefits of primary mother custody , primary father custody , and shared custody and the risks and benefits associated with substantial versus equal time with each parent . in a relocation case , the examiner should explain the risks and benefits of primary mother custody in location x as opposed to the risks and benefits of primary father custody in location . finally , in all cases , the evaluator should explain the risks and benefits of shared decision making as opposed to some other plan that may give one parent decisions in certain areas of the child life or perhaps even utilizing a parenting coordinator . in some cases , it might be best to provide the court with detailed parenting plans reflecting different options rather than a single recommended parenting plan . in such a case , the evaluator should detail the risks and benefits of each potential parenting plan in the report . finally , and most important , it is critical to present both the data that support the conclusions as well as the data that do not support the conclusions . recommendations . in recent years , there has been a renewed debate about whether examiners should make recommendations about the ultimate issue in child custody cases . judges typically prefer recommendations , and therefore it remains the custom of evaluators to provide them . nevertheless , it is clearly the judge job to make orders based on all of the evidence at trial rather than simply rubberstamping the recommendations of a child custody evaluator . family law judges use the evaluator recommendations as a starting place , not an end point , and they assess the usefulness of the evaluator recommendations based on the consistency with other evidence presented at trial as well as the forensic integrity and quality of the evaluator work product . stahl suggested that , when one or more best interests or protective factors would suggest in favor of the child relocation and one or more best interests or risk factors would suggest against the child relocation , the evaluator should not weigh the various factors ; this is the judge job . instead , in such situations , the evaluator should provide those conclusions to the court and provide multiple recommendations , with the ultimate decision based on the judge weighting of the various best interests , risk , and protective factors . in addition to the ultimate issue of parenting time , it is common in child custody evaluations to make recommendations in these areas : legal custody and decision making , legal custody or decision making . interventions , including counseling for either parent and the children , parent or the children , identifying the suggested goals for that counseling . substance abuse or domestic violence related interventions , if relevant . alternative dispute resolution for ongoing issues . any other recommendations relevant to the family that was evaluated . child custody evaluations are complex and require integrating disparate information gathered from a variety of participants and information of various types with disparate characteristics . like a jigsaw puzzle , child custody evaluations require a persistent attitude of gathering more information , not only to confirm but also to disconfirm various hypotheses , until things fall into place . evaluators need to avoid acting like stenographers and maintain a style of curiosity , always gathering additional relevant information until complex issues are understood . to be an effective evaluator , one must develop a thick skin , because one or both parents are likely to be upset with the recommendations . in some jurisdictions , it is not uncommon for parents to file licensing complaints alleging bias or unprofessional behavior regardless of how thorough and professional the evaluation is . indeed , the child custody evaluator carries more risk for licensing complaints than any other role played by the professional psychologist . finally , if a case goes to trial , it is possible that one or both attorneys might hire a consultant or testifying expert who might criticize some of the work . in spite of the risks and difficulties , conducting child custody evaluations can be professionally rewarding and satisfying . a child custody evaluator provides a beneficial service for family law judges that can help them understand the complexities of the most conflicted families they serve . child custody evaluations can provide guidance for families who can settle their dispute and move forward following a welldone evaluation . because child custody evaluators work in an interdisciplinary field , opportunities for ongoing learning and professional development are ever present . most important , child custody evaluators keep the focus on the best interests of the children and therefore help them and their parents to adjust to the change in their lives as they develop healthier and more adaptive ways of moving forward . conducting personal injury evaluations . unlike criminal proceedings in which the government charges an individual with having committed an unlawful act , civil proceedings involve disputes between private parties . many such cases involve allegations that one party has been injured by another party and seeks compensation for the damage that was done . such actions are known as tort or personal injury cases , which are the subject of this chapter . although many personal injury cases involve claims of physical injuries or financial losses , allegations of psychological injury or emotional distress can also be elements of a tort action . koch , douglas , nicholls and neill defined psychological injuries as stress related emotional conditions resulting from real or imagined threats or injuries caused by a third party . this chapter discusses the legal , ethical , and practical aspects of performing forensic psychological evaluations in personal injury cases . legal context of personal injury evaluations . it is unlikely , however , that the neighbor would be charged for having ice on the doorstep . for an act to be tortious , it must meet four criteria : duty , dereliction , damage , and causality . duty refers to an obligation by the defendant to the plaintiff . consider a psychologist obligation to keep confidential a patient disclosures . if the defendant is judged to be responsible for the injury suffered by the plaintiff , the plaintiff will be awarded damages in the form of monetary compensation . the amount of the award is determined by the degree of damage suffered by the plaintiff and the behavior of the defendant that resulted in the plaintiff injury . tortious acts can be intentional or negligent . both federal and state courts have rules governing the process of civil litigation . in the federal court system , these rules are known as the federal rules of civil procedure . all states and the district of columbia have similar sets of rules governing civil procedure in their jurisdictions . the defendant is then notified of the pending litigation and provides a response , or answer . in addition , the defendant may take other actions , including filing a motion to dismiss , filing a counterclaim whereby the defendant makes a claim against the plaintiff , or filing a notice of an affirmative defense that seeks to negate the plaintiff right to recover . the second phase of personal injury litigation is known as discovery . the psychologist also provides a written report describing the findings from the examination and the opinions he or she reached . following this disclosure , the psychologist is likely to be deposed by the opposing attorney and will be required to provide the opposing attorney with documents , including test data , notes , and correspondence related to the evaluation . the next phase of litigation is the trial . following direct examination of each witness , the defendant attorney will cross examine the witness . cross examination is intended to raise questions about the reliability of the witness evidence and to expose weaknesses or contradictions in the witness testimony , evidence or to expose weaknesses or contradictions in the witness testimony . in the midst of the adversarial legal system , ethics demand that psychologists remain objective , impartial , and fair . psychologists have a duty to the court to offer testimony that is reliable , helpful , honest and objective . this commitment to objectivity must be maintained regardless of which party retained the psychologist , how sympathetic or unsympathetic the plaintiff may be , or the nature of the relationship the psychologist has with the attorneys in the case . one way to facilitate objectivity is for the psychologist to establish consistent evaluation procedures that are utilized regardless of the specific circumstances or retaining party . as described by greenberg and shuman , the role of the therapist is to demonstrate support , acceptance , and empathy toward the patient and seek to understand the patient perceptions and feelings . the therapist knowledge of the patient world usually is based exclusively on the patient self report and is likely to be skewed by the patient biases , assumptions , and attitudes . the therapist is less concerned about the objective truth of the patient circumstances than the patient subjective understanding of these circumstances . because of these differences , psychologists should avoid acting as both treatment provider and objective evaluator for the same individual . this does not preclude a therapist from testifying as a fact witness about the patient treatment , although consideration should be given as to how such testimony might affect the therapeutic relationship . attorneys are required to advocate vigorously for their clients and expect the experts they retain to do the same . professional ethics demand that psychologists avoid entering into relationships that could compromise their objectivity , competence , or effectiveness . because of this requirement , it is important to consider the potential impact of influences such as the therapeutic bond , financial remuneration , and personal persuasion . as described by kane , the expert must resist this pressure , remaining impartial and advocating for his or her opinion , not for his or her retaining attorney . adequate basis for opinions . psychologists are required to base the opinions in reports and testimony on information and techniques sufficient to substantiate their findings . this is consistent with the requirements of the legal system that expert testimony meet certain standards , including that it be based on sufficient facts and data and reliable methods . this means that the evaluator must collect data that are comprehensive , relevant , and valid . preventing misuse of findings . psychologists have an ethical obligation to ensure that their reports and testimony do not contain statements that are untrue or are likely to mislead others . section eleven of the sgfp provides more detailed guidance : forensic practitioners do not distort or withhold relevant evidence or opinion in reports or testimony . forensic psychologists must remain alert to attempts to present their findings in ways that may misleading the judge or jury by way of overemphasizing certain points or failing to acknowledge conflicting data . the forensic psychologist must also be sure that the retaining attorney does not misrepresent the psychologist credentials , training , or experience . however , courts have been less receptive to claims based solely on psychological damage absent a physical injury . according to koch , neill , and douglas , courts have long been skeptical of claims of psychological injury because of fears that , without objective markers for the existence of mental health conditions , such disorders would be easy to fabricate . the ali defines harm in the context of tort law as the existence of loss or detriment of any kind to a person resulting from any cause . greenberg , shuman , and meyer differentiated between the clinical issue of assigning a specific diagnostic label and using a diagnostic classification as the basis for a legal determinant : law does not make diagnosis an essential element of a claim or defense . instead , legal criteria for these actions are functional and concern themselves with impairment or capacity , without regard to diagnosis . furthermore , the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders cautions about its use in nonclinical settings . grisso defined functional capacity as that which an individual can do or accomplish , as well as the knowledge , understanding , or beliefs that may be necessary for that accomplishment . since functional capacity is distinct from diagnosis , it can not be assumed that the presence of a particular condition is necessarily related to a specific level of functioning . with the understanding that establishing a diagnosis is not required for a claim of psychological injury , there are some conditions that are commonly claimed by plaintiffs in tort cases . witt and weitz reported that the most common symptoms seen following motor vehicle accidents include chronic pain , depression , and anxiety . melton reported that the condition variously known as traumatic neurosis stress , ptsd stress , acute stress disorder is the most commonly observed mental injury in personal injury cases . koch listed ptsd , asd , and major depressive episode as conditions that may be the subject of personal injury litigation . kane pointed to ptsd as the most common diagnosis in personal injury cases . ptsd and asd occupy a unique position in the realm of psychiatric diagnoses , in that these conditions are by definition caused by an external event or circumstance . he warned her not to tell anyone , or he would fix it so she would have to stay longer in the hospital , and besides , no one would take the word of a crazy person . scenario two : a man who was employed as an executive at a large corporation for a number of years was assigned to report to a new supervisor . he found himself frequently butting heads with his new boss , as they had very different approaches and personal styles . koch recommended considering five questions about a traumatic event : was there a life threatening injury as a result of the traumatic event ? was there a physically disabling injury that could conceivably limit employment or accomplishment of important life goals ? did the individual witness a death or severe injury ? was there a realistic fear that the individual life was in danger despite no obvious traumatic injury ? was there some threat to their physical integrity ? if one or more of these questions is answered in the affirmative , it is likely that the event in question would meet the requirements of criterion a . it is important to remember , however , that the fact that an individual has experienced an extreme traumatic stressor does not necessarily mean that the individual will undoubtedly develop ptsd . these include persistently reexperiencing the traumatic event , avoiding stimuli associated with the trauma , and experiencing persistent symptoms of increased arousal . as noted by brunello , several of the symptoms of ptsd are not specific to that disorder and overlap with other mental health conditions , including major depressive disorder , anxiety disorders , and substance abuse , which makes diagnosis more complicated . nemeroff suggested that the presence of criterion symptoms in the months following the trauma was most predictive of the development of ptsd . it should be noted that , even if symptoms of ptsd do appear , they may not persist for months or years . koch noted that , among most representative samples of ptsd sufferers , there is as much as fifty percent spontaneous remission within the first year after experiencing the traumatic event . if there is a notable decrement in functional capacity , it must have been caused by the event in question . unfortunately , the practical reality is far from simple . assessing causality is clearly the most difficult task facing the forensic examiner in personal injury work . greenberg , otto , and long pointed out that no psychological test can reliably assess what the plaintiff functioning was like prior to the events in question or separate the effects of one trauma from another . establishing the plaintiff preinjury functioning in the absence of contemporaneously created , extensively detailed , objectively based records is extremely challenging . assessing causality is made more difficult if the plaintiff manifested compromised functioning or experienced other traumatic events prior to the events in question . she filed a lawsuit alleging , among other things , that she suffered from ptsd as a result of the accident . as a child , the plaintiff was sexually abused by her alcoholic father . by high school , she was frequently skipping classes , developed substance abuse problems , and cut her arms and legs to cope with stress . she dropped out of school and moved in with an older boyfriend who physically assaulted her . she eventually moved out and was working part time in a fast food restaurant at the time of the accident . the woman described in this example has a history of multiple traumas predating the car accident . it is quite possible that her history of abuse led to the development of symptoms of psychological distress . her history also shows evidence of impaired functioning prior to the accident , as evidenced by her difficulty in school and reliance on inadequate coping strategies . despite this history , however , it is also possible that this woman suffered additional psychological damage as a result of the car accident . the difficulty for the examiner would be attempting to sort out which of her current symptoms are attributable to the accident and whether her functioning has been further compromised as a result . consider another scenario : the plaintiff , a thirty sixyearold man , was in a convenience store when an armed robber entered the store and threatened to shoot the clerk unless he gave him cash . the clerk complied and the robber left . the man subsequently filed a lawsuit against the owner of the convenience store , alleging that , as a result of this experience , he had developed panic disorder and depression so severe he was unable to leave his house . as a result , he lost his job as an accountant , a position that he had held for eight years . as a child , the man had been physically abused by his stepfather over a period of ten years . despite this , he had been successful in school , had finished college , and had earned a graduate degree . at the time of the robbery , he owned a home and was engaged . practical issues . personal injury evaluations involve managing relationships with different parties including the plaintiff , the defendant , and their legal representatives . the nature of the evaluator relationship with each party , including the degree of contact and the flow of communication , varies depending on which party has retained his or her services . it is important for the evaluator to understand how to effectively manage these relationships . dealing with attorneys . in most cases , the forensic examiner is retained by the attorney who represents one of the parties in the litigation . contact usually is initiated by telephone . the attorney then asks about the expert interest in accepting the referral . the expert should clarify the role he or she is expected to play that is , testifying expert or consultant to ensure that there are no misunderstandings . fees should be discussed in this initial conversation . the expert should request a financial retainer from the attorney along with a letter of agreement outlining the scope of the expert projected involvement and payment arrangements . dealing with examinees . examinees may present differently depending on whether the examiner was retained by their own attorney or by the opposing attorney . when the examiner is retained by the plaintiff attorney , the plaintiff may approach the examination with the notion that the expert has been hired to help him out or to prove her case . sometimes plaintiffs assume the examiner will continue to treat them after the initial evaluation . this is true even if the expert has been retained by the plaintiff own attorney . the plaintiff should be informed about the following : the context of the evaluation . if the plaintiff refuses to participate , the examiner should contact the retaining attorney to discuss how to proceed . throughout the examination , the expert needs to walk a fine line in terms of building sufficient rapport to conduct a productive evaluation while remaining clear that the purpose of the meeting is not therapeutic . these questions usually include one or more of these : does the plaintiff show evidence of a psychological injury ? sometimes this question will include asking the expert to comment on a specific diagnosis or to formulate a diagnostic impression . if the plaintiff shows symptoms or injuries , are they causally related to the actions of the defendant ? the expert may be asked to specify if the defendant actions were the sole cause , the primary cause , or a contributing cause of the plaintiff injuries . the expert may be asked to identify other events or circumstances that may have contributed to the plaintiff injuries . the expert may also be asked if the plaintiff own actions or inactions contributed to the damage he or she has suffered . how has the plaintiff functioning changed as a result of the claimed injury ? this question usually refers to changes in areas such as work capacity , educational performance , social relationships , family responsibilities , and selfcare . will the plaintiff need treatment ? the expert may be asked to identify the type of treatment and the frequency and duration of the treatment that is being recommended . as discussed earlier in this chapter , accurate opinions can be formulated only when the expert has collected data that are both relevant and sufficient . data collection is especially challenging in a personal injury evaluation , as the expert is expected to form an understanding of the plaintiff past as well as present condition . the use of multiple sources of data is essential in this process . doing this allows the expert to gain an understanding of the plaintiff and the circumstances leading to the lawsuit . it also allows the expert to identify areas to explore in greater detail when the plaintiff is interviewed . the records involved in any case will vary considerably in volume and nature , depending on the circumstances of the plaintiff , the details of the litigation , and the plaintiff history . typically , available records will fall into one of three categories : medical and mental health treatment records , educational and work records , and legal documents . especially when there is a large volume of records , it is often helpful to begin by organizing the records chronologically and creating a timeline of events , both before and after the claimed injury . treatment records , particularly if they are available both prior and subsequent to the claimed injury , can be valuable in understanding changes in the plaintiff emotional functioning . in reviewing legal documents associated with the case , it is often best to start with the formal complaint . this will lay out , from the plaintiff perspective , the events leading up to the lawsuit , including the nature of the injuries for which the plaintiff is seeking compensation . the plaintiff deposition can be another source of useful information . clinical interview . the purpose of the clinical interview is twofold : to gather information from the plaintiff perspective about his or her history , events surrounding the injury , and events subsequent to the injury ; and to give the expert an opportunity to directly observe the plaintiff appearance , speech , affect and behavior . sufficient time should be allowed for these purposes . a thorough interview usually takes a minimum of three hours due to the breadth of information that should be covered . for example , rather than asking the plaintiff do you think you have ptsd ? the examiner might ask the plaintiff to describe his or her daily life both before and after the events in question . it is useful to start with openended questions and then probe for specific details or examples as necessary . selfreported data can vary in accuracy for a variety of reasons , including the unreliability of memory and limitations in insight . several authors have suggested that the accuracy of selfreported data appears to be influenced by situational factors such as involvement in litigation or compensation seeking . leeshaley and williams , leeshaley , and djanogly reported that , in compensation situations , examinees were more likely to report superior premorbid functioning and poorer current functioning , and they were more likely to exaggerate the number and severity of their symptoms than examinees who were not seeking compensation . as an adjunct to the face to face interview and direct observation of the plaintiff , self report questionnaires and surveys can be used to record and document the plaintiff reported symptoms , complaints , and functional limitations . self report questionnaires should not be confused with psychological tests , in that the former were designed for treatment planning , have high face validity , and lack the means for assessing the validity of the examinee responses . because of these limitations , selfreport questionnaires are useful for collecting information , but they should not be considered objective evidence of valid symptoms . psychological testing . melton described psychological testing as more relevant in personal injury evaluations than in any other forensic context , as many of the constructs measured by psychological tests are directly related to the assessment of distress and impairments in functional abilities . witt and weitz suggested that psychological testing can be useful in three ways : testing may be helpful in identifying the presence of personality disorders . such disorders are , by definition , present from early adulthood . psychological testing can help in determining if the plaintiff is exaggerating symptoms or otherwise dissimulating , through the use of standalone measures of response style as well as validity scales imbedded in multiscale inventories , such as those found in the mmpi two . despite the potential usefulness of psychological testing , no standard battery has been consistently identified in the literature for use in personal injury evaluations , and greenberg pointed out that not all personal injury examinations require the same assessment instruments . in making decisions about which , if any , psychological tests to use , these authors stressed the importance of using measures that validly assess the constructs they are designed to assess and noted that psychological tests are a method for generating hypotheses rather than for directly answering psycholegal questions . in addition , koch , douglas , nicholls , and neill cautioned that many of the tests commonly employed in clinical and forensic assessment may not have been evaluated scientifically in an ecologically valid manner for the population being assessed in a personal injury evaluation . several researchers have studied the frequency in which specific psychological tests are used in various forensic contexts . generally , these questions involve : understanding the plaintiff preevent functioning , understanding the plaintiff current functioning , and determining the credibility of the plaintiff presentation during the evaluation . as pointed out by koch , nader , and haring , although psychological testing can be very useful in evaluating the plaintiff current mental health functioning , there is no scientific support for the use of psychological testing to make definitive statements about an individual functioning at some time in the past . psychological testing may , however , be helpful in gathering information about sustained patterns of functioning that , when used in conjunction with data obtained from collateral sources , can provide some insight into the plaintiff preinjury capacities . in assessing the plaintiff current emotional functioning , multiscale inventories , such as the mmpi two and the personality assessment inventory , are particularly useful as these instruments facilitate an assessment of a broad range of psychopathology . in addition to the embedded validity scales in instruments like the mmpi and the pai , standalone measures such as the structured interview of reported symptoms , the miller forensic assessment of symptoms test , and the structured inventory of malingered symptomatology can be used . rosen and powel explored the use of a neuropsychological forcedchoice symptom validity test to detect symptom exaggeration in ptsd . they recommended including one of these instruments in forensic evaluations of ptsd if the plaintiff reports problems with memory or concentration . regardless of the methods employed , it is important to remember that no test exists that can prove the plaintiff is malingering . wellvalidated measures of symptom overendorsement can provide useful information about the plaintiff approach to the assessment , but they are not sufficient grounds for inferring malingering . collateral data . the use of collateral or thirdparty data is an established principle of forensic mental health assessment . collateral data can help to fill in information that is absent in the plaintiff selfreport , help the expert to form a clearer picture of the plaintiff functioning prior to the injury , and corroborate information obtained from the plaintiff during the interview and from psychological testing . there are many potential sources of collateral data . the specific sources selected will vary depending on the type of information the expert is seeking , the plaintiff situation , and the availability and willingness of sources to provide data . in general , the plaintiff authorization should be sought before contacting or interviewing collateral sources ; however , the plaintiff consent may not be necessary when the examination has been courtordered . collateral data , like other forms of data , are vulnerable to distortion and misinterpretation . heilbrun , warren , and picarello described issues that can limit the accuracy of information obtained from collateral sources . these include reluctance to participate in the evaluation , bias , lack of specific expertise , suggestibility , and memory loss . similar to the approach used when interviewing the plaintiff , interviews with collateral sources should focus on obtaining descriptions of the plaintiff behavior as observed by the collateral source rather than conclusions about the plaintiff condition . this information is best solicited with openended questions about the source observations of the plaintiff followed by probing for specific examples to support the general statements . interpretation of findings . as noted by witt and weitz , personal injury evaluations are challenging because the evaluator is attempting to retrospectively reconstruct the plaintiff mental condition before , during and after an event or series of events . although an assessment of current psychological functioning is important , the main thrust of the evaluation is on discerning whether a change in adjustment occurred at some time in the past and whether this was caused by some prior event . koch pointed out that , although it is possible to evaluate the plaintiff current emotional functioning and provide descriptive information about his or her past functioning based on information provided by the plaintiff , written records , and collateral sources , there is no scientifically sound method for determining that the plaintiff current condition was definitively caused by a specific event in the past . that said , the expert is often expected to offer some opinions as to the plaintiff current condition and the relationship of this condition to the actions of the defendant . because causality is an ultimate issue question , not all courts permit experts to testify about causality . establishing damage . as discussed earlier in this chapter , establishing damage is not synonymous with assigning a diagnostic label . in order to establish damage , three factors must be considered : does the plaintiff manifest symptoms of psychological distress that affect his or her ability to function ? are these symptoms and functional impairments valid ? are these symptoms and functional impairments different from what the plaintiff was experiencing prior to the events leading to the lawsuit ? applying psychology to civil proceedings . in addressing these questions , it is helpful to aggregate information from interviews , records , and testing regarding the plaintiff past and present functioning and to consider each reported symptom and functional impairment separately . for example , if the plaintiff claims that since his accident , he has been too depressed to leave the house most days , the expert can review the plaintiff treatment records , employment records , and information obtained from collateral sources to establish if the impairments the plaintiff is claiming were present prior to the accident . next , the expert can examine test data , collateral information , and current treatment records to determine if these impairments are currently present . the expert should note specific examples and test findings that address each symptom and impairment in functioning that the plaintiff reports , examples or test findings that address each symptom and impairment in functioning that the plaintiff reports . doing this allows the expert to corroborate specific pieces of information rather than attempting to confirm or disconfirm a particular diagnosis . if requested by the retaining attorney , once the expert has reviewed these data and has reached some opinions about symptoms and impairments that are currently present , the expert can consider whether the plaintiff symptoms relate to a specific diagnosis . this can be accomplished by reviewing each diagnostic criterion to determine if evidence exists that the plaintiff meets that criterion . as noted earlier in this chapter , damage must be related to a change in the plaintiff functioning , not just the existence of a valid diagnosis . the expert must consider how the plaintiff ability to carry out important functions in his or her daily life has changed as a result of the emotional injury . consideration of functional impairments should always be based on the capacity of the plaintiff prior to the injury . addressing causality . psychological problems are almost always multidetermined . genetic predisposition , early experiences , physiology , social support , substance abuse or exposure , culture , stress , injury , and disease may all play a role to one degree or another . therefore , it is impossible to say with certainty that a particular event was the sole cause of an individual symptoms . in attempting to address issues of causality , four factors can be considered : did the plaintiff symptoms arise subsequent to the events in question ? did the plaintiff experience other traumas that might have contributed to the development of the symptoms ? are other conditions present that could explain , at least in part , the symptoms the plaintiff is experiencing ? has there been a notable change in the plaintiff functional capacity subsequent to the events in question ? by considering this information , the evaluator can begin to formulate opinions about the likelihood that the observed changes in the plaintiff are proximately related to the actions of the defendant . communication of the expert opinion may be accomplished in several different ways . these include the expert disclosure , a written report , a deposition conducted by the opposing party , and testimony at trial . expert disclosure . once the examination is complete and the expert has formed opinions about the plaintiff , the retaining attorney should be contacted by telephone . the examiner should not write a report until this conversation takes place . after speaking to the expert , the attorney may decide that the examiner opinion will not be helpful to his or her case and will not want a report . if the attorney determines that the expert testimony would be useful , the attorney will request a written report . the attorney may also discuss an expert disclosure , which may be submitted prior to the report being completed . although this document will most often be prepared by the attorney , the expert should carefully review the disclosure before it is submitted to ensure that his or her opinion has not been misrepresented or misconstrued . written report . as long as this required information is included , the actual format and organization of the report is left to the expert . a suggested format that includes all the required elements follows . the reader may also wish to consult weiner for a more indepth discussion of forensic report writing . subject of expert opinion . the report should begin with a paragraph identifying the party who retained the expert and a brief statement describing the purpose of the evaluation . summary of expert opinion . a list of the expert opinions that will be presented in the report should follow . qualifications . then the expert should provide one or two paragraphs describing his or her academic and experiential credentials as related to the case . the final sentence should state that a copy of the expert curriculum vitae is attached to the report as an addendum . the cv must contain a listing of the expert publications . data sources . this section should list all the records the expert reviewed , the examination procedures , and any collateral interviews . summary of information obtained from records . this section summarizes the content of the records reviewed by the expert . examination of the plaintiff . this section contains behavioral observations of the plaintiff , summary of the history of the events as reported by the plaintiff , the plaintiff description of his or her injuries and functional impairments , and psychometric test results . expert opinion . this section is a full description and rationale for each opinion listed under the summary of expert opinion . each opinion should be supported by examples from the records , interviews and test finding , interviews or test finding . signature . the report must be signed by the expert . addenda . addenda should include the expert cv , a list of cases in which sworn testimony has been provided in the previous four years , and an invoice or other documentation of the compensation the expert has received from the retaining attorney . sometimes the retaining attorney will ask for a draft report before the final version is sent . it is acceptable for an attorney to point out grammatical or factual errors in a draft report or to suggest that something be explained more fully or clearly . it is not acceptable , however , for the attorney to suggest changes in the examiner opinions . the examiner has a duty to carefully maintain all documentation , notes , and raw data from the evaluation , including information in electronic format , as most of this material is discoverable . some communications between the retaining attorney and the expert may fall under the workproduct exemption from discovery . in the federal court system , discovery is governed by frcp twenty six . the workproduct exemption allows an attorney to protect materials prepared in anticipation of litigation from discovery by the opposing attorney , including material prepared by expert witnesses . it does not protect the examiner opinions , qualifications , prior testimony , compensation received , or data provided to the expert by the attorney all of which are subject to discovery . rule twenty six was amended in two thousand and ten to provide greater protection from discovery . under this revision , draft reports and communications between the attorney and the expert may be exempt from discovery . it is important to remember that each jurisdiction has different rules regarding discovery . ultimately it is up to the judge to determine what is and is not exempt from discovery . because of this fact , the best practice is to assume that everything is discoverable unless told otherwise by the judge . it is very likely that the opposing attorney will want to depose the expert in order to discover additional information about the examiner opinions and the foundation for these opinions . this is also an opportunity for the opposing attorney to size up the expert in order to get a sense of how effectively the expert would testify at a trial . typically the examiner will receive a subpoena commanding appearance for a deposition and to bring everything in the examiner possession relating to the case . a deposition , in which the expert will provide sworn testimony , might last for as little as an hour or as long as several days . the opposing attorney , the retaining attorney , and a court reporter will be present . sometimes the plaintiff attends the deposition as well . the rules of the deposition are explained at the outset . briefly , all answers must be verbal . if a question is not understood , the witness should ask for clarification before answering . the retaining attorney may enter an objection for the record , but the witness is expected to answer the question regardless . it is important for the witness to listen carefully to each question and to answer truthfully and succinctly . occasionally , the opposing attorney may attempt to provoke the witness to see how the witness might react on the stand . if this happens , the best course of action is to remain calm and avoid reacting emotionally . the use of anger or humor is not recommended . at the end of the deposition , the witness is asked if he or she wants to waive signature . the best answer to this question is no , in response to which the deposition transcript will be sent to the witness , who will have an opportunity to correct any errors that were made in recording his or her testimony or errors made by the witness . typically , the expert time spent at the deposition is paid by the attorney conducting the deposition , whereas preparation time usually is paid by the attorney who retained the expert . courtroom testimony . many personal injury cases do not end up going to trial . the parties can agree to a settlement at any time , including during the trial . if the expert is required to testify in court , it is helpful to review the deposition transcript beforehand . if there are any discrepancies between the testimony given at deposition and the expert testimony at trial , the opposing attorney will almost certainly point this out . the examiner report should form the basis for his or her testimony . the retaining attorney will directly examine the examiner using openended questions . in general , it is usually a good idea to review the report with the attorney ahead of time to ensure that the attorney understands the opinions and will ask questions that will facilitate the expert explaining his or her opinion to the judge and jury . applying psychology to civil proceedings . during testimony , the expert should speak clearly and avoid using jargon . ideally , the expert should exude a competent , respectful , professional , yet approachable demeanor . after the direct examination is completed , the opposing attorney will crossexamine the expert . the cross examination is intended to expose flaws in the expert opinion or to raise questions about the expert credibility . it is important for the expert to listen to all questions carefully before answering . if either attorney objects during direct or cross examination , the expert should say nothing until the objection has been resolved by the judge . if the objection is sustained , the question must be answered . whether responding to questions under direct or cross examination , the expert should always keep in mind that his or her primary obligation is to serve the court by giving truthful , unbiased testimony . psychologists must be aware of the limits of their science , especially in terms of extrapolating from the present examination of the plaintiff to inferences about the plaintiff functioning at some time in the past or predictions about his or her future condition . in order to be admissible , the evidence given by the expert witness must be relevant to the legal questions at issue and based on sound science . it is important to not overstate the certainty of one opinions , to acknowledge conflicting data , and to give consideration to alternative hypotheses . assessing competency to stand trial . competency to stand trial is a concept of jurisprudence allowing the postponement of criminal proceedings for those defendants who are unable to participate in their defense on account of mental disease or intellectual disability . this number has increased substantially from estimates in nineteen ninety seven that placed the annual number of competency evaluations between twenty five and thirty nine . we urge readers interested in pursuing work in the competency arena to supplement this chapter with additional sources as well as workshops and other forms of continuing education . the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology also contain discussions relevant to competency evaluations . english common law allowed for an arraignment , trial , judgment or execution of an alleged capital offender to be stayed if he or she be absolutely mad . over time , statutes that have been created in the united states and canada have further defined and extended the common law practice . the modern standard in the united states was established in dusky united states . although the wording differs across jurisdictions , all states use a variant of the dusky standard to define competency . while the concept of competency to stand trial has been long established in law , ambiguities in the wording of dusky raise a number of questions . the problem in defining and assessing competency leads to a broad range of interpretations of the dusky standard . because the courts and legislatures have given mental health professionals a large share of the responsibility for defining and evaluating competency , it should not be surprising to find that mental status issues , such as presence or absence of psychosis , traditionally have played a dominant role in the findings of evaluators . historically , in fact , evaluators initially equated psychosis with incompetency . furthermore , evaluators in the past rarely took into account the specific demands of a defendant case . as a consequence , the evaluations were based on the same standard mental status examinations that had been used with other patients in the hospital . psychological tests were rarely used ; if they were employed , they were utilized as a diagnostic tool to determine the presence or absence of psychosis . over the past thirty five years , these practices have been challenged and improved based on empirical research findings . nevertheless , although forensic evaluators today typically have more training than those in the past , most states still do not require specific training of mental health professionals who conduct such evaluations . for instance , the abilities required by the defendant in his or her specific case should be taken into account when assessing competence . this contextual perspective was summarized by golding and roesch : mere presence of severe disturbance is only a threshold issue it must be further demonstrated that such severe disturbance in this defendant , facing these charges , in light of existing evidence , anticipating the substantial effort of a particular attorney with a relationship of known characteristics , results in the defendant being unable to rationally assist the attorney or to comprehend the nature of the proceedings and their likely outcome . in regina whittle , the supreme court of canada ruled that there is to be only one standard for competency regardless of the specific abilities to be performed by the accused . however , unlike in godinez moran , the forensic examiners had actually evaluated mr . whittle in these specific contexts , regardless of whether the standard to be applied was the same or different as a function of the context . in godinez moran , the united states supreme court held similarly that the standard for the various types of competency should be considered the same . justice thomas wrote for the majority : the standard adopted by the ninth circuit is whether a defendant who seeks to plead guilty or waive counsel has the capacity for reasoned choice among the alternatives available to him . how this standard is different from the dusky standard whether the defendant has a rational understanding of the proceedings is not readily apparent to us . in his dissent , justice blackmun noted that the majority analysis is contrary to both common sense and longstanding case law and reasoned that competency can not be considered in a vacuum , separate from its specific legal context . justice blackmun argued that competency for one purpose does not necessarily translate to competency for another purpose and noted that previous supreme court cases required competency evaluations to be specifically tailored to the context and purpose of a proceeding . what is missing from the majority opinion in godinez , however , is that , unlike the circumstances in whittle , moran competency to waive counsel or plead guilty to death penalty murder charges was never assessed by the forensic examiners , regardless of which standard was employed . the godinez holding has been subsequently criticized by legal scholars and courts alike . in the words of the third circuit court of appeals , this difficult case presents us with a window through which to view the real world effects of the supreme court decision in godinez moran , and it is not a pretty sight . the problem is not whether the standards for various psycholegal competencies are higher , different , or the same , but rather , more fundamentally , whether the defendant has been examined with respect to these issues in the first place . a single standard for competency to stand trial was a basis for finding colin ferguson , a man accused of murdering six people and injuring nineteen others on the long island rail road in nineteen ninety three , competent to waive counsel and represent himself . his lawyers intended to raise the insanity defense , but ferguson objected and requested that he represent himself . since he had been found competent to stand trial , the trial court allowed him to represent himself , or proceed pro se . the bizarre nature of the trial , in which ferguson cross examined the police who arrested him as well as some victims , led perlin to comment that the proceedings were a charade , and he concluded that the godinez decision resulted in a trial in which dignity , a prerequisite of a fair trial , was not preserved . he was subsequently charged with attempted murder , battery with a deadly weapon , criminal recklessness , and theft . in two thousand , he was found incompetent to stand trial and remanded for treatment . he was restored to competency after seven months ; however , his attorneys requested a second evaluation in two thousand and two , whereby he was found competent . in two thousand and three , his attorneys requested a third evaluation , which resulted in a finding of incompetence . his competence was restored once again and he proceeded with adjudication . in two thousand and five , when his trial was set to begin , edwards asked to proceed pro se . the trial judge denied the request . edwards proceeded with appointed counsel and ultimately was convicted of the attempted murder and battery charges . the case carried through the appeals process and eventually was heard by the united states supreme court , which held that the constitution does not prevent states from requiring counsel for those found competent to stand trial but who are not deemed competent to proceed pro se . the court addressed its earlier decision in godinez in the ruling but indicated that it did not provide direction in this case because the defendant ability to conduct a defense at trial was not an issue at hand in godinez and because the holding allows a state to permit a questionably competent defendant to proceed pro se , but it did not indicate whether a state may deny such a defendant . standards of competence are one area of inquiry , whereas the conceptualization of competence is another . some researchers and scholars have provided reconceptualizations of competence to stand trial . winick cogently argued that , in some circumstances , it might be in the best interests of the defendant to proceed with a trial even if he or she is incompetent . he postulated that this could take the form of a provisional trial wherein the support of the defense attorney would serve to ensure protection of the defendant . this would allow the defendant to proceed with his or her case while maintaining decorum in the courtroom and respecting the defendant constitutional rights . bonnie also set forth a reformulation of competence to stand trial . he proposed a distinction between two types of competencies : competence to assist counsel and decisional competence . he argued that defendants found incompetent to assist counsel should be barred from proceeding until they were restored to competence , whereas defendants found decisionally incompetent could proceed in certain cases in which their lawyers were able to present a defense . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . another major change has been the shift in the type of settings in which competency assessments are conducted . roesch and golding argued that inpatient evaluations are unnecessary in all but perhaps a small percentage of cases , because most determinations of competency can easily be made on the basis of brief screening interviews . community based settings , including jails and mental health centers , are increasingly used to conduct evaluations . in nineteen ninety four , grisso , coccozza , steadman , fisher , and greer published the results of a national survey they had conducted to determine the organization of pretrial forensic evaluation services in the united states . they concluded that the traditional use of centrally located , inpatient facilities for obtaining pretrial evaluations survives in only a minority of states , having been replaced by other models that employ various types of outpatient approaches . one compelling reason for this shift is cost . in nineteen seventy seven , laben , kashgarian , nessa , and spencer estimated that the cost of the community based evaluations they conducted in tennessee was one third of the cost of institution based evaluations . in nineteen eighty five , winick estimated that one hundred and eighty five million was spent annually on competency evaluations ; however , more recent estimates are two or three times higher and probably reach $ one billion if the costs associated with the entire competency evaluation and treatment process are considered . for instance , in two thousand , bonnie and grisso estimated that approximately sixty competency evaluations were performed each year . blending community and institution based evaluations , a typical evaluation cost is five per defendant ; thus , approximately three hundred million may be spent annually on competency evaluations . if twenty percent of examined defendants are adjudicated incompetent , there are twelve restoration commitments yearly . in a typical jurisdiction , the average cost of a year in a forensic institution is one hundred and forty five ; thus , a conservative estimate of restoration costs per defendant would be thirty six for a three month period , bringing the annual restoration total to approximately four hundred and thirty five million . base rates for competency referrals and for incompetency determinations vary widely across jurisdictions and evaluation settings . this occurs for a number of reasons , including variations in examiner training and the use of forensically relevant evaluation procedures ; differences in the application of standards by examiners ; the availability of pretrial mental health services ; the nature of the referral system ; inadequate treatment services for the chronically mentally ill and criminalization of their conduct ; and the extent to which judges scrutinize bona fide doubt about a defendant competency before granting evaluation petitions . nevertheless , a metaanalysis of sixty eight studies reported a base rate of incompetence of twenty seven percent . precise data are not available , but conservatively , half of those found competent presented little or no reason for doubting their competency and could have been detected by adequate screening procedures . this is true in the united states as well as in other countries . zapf and roesch investigated the rate of incompetence in individuals remanded to an inpatient setting for an assessment of fitness to stand trial in canada . their results indicated that only eleven percent of the remands were unfit to stand trial and , further , that with the use of a brief screening interview , eighty two percent of the remands could have been screened out at some earlier time because they were clearly fit to stand trial . many of the assessment procedures we describe later in this chapter are either explicitly designed for screening or could easily be adapted for use in such settings . a number of instruments designed to assess competence have been developed over the past fifty years . this work was pioneered by mcgarry and his colleagues and served as the starting point for a more sophisticated and systematic approach to the assessment of competency . in nineteen eighty six , grisso coined the term forensic assessment instrument to describe instruments that provide the framework for conducting forensic assessments . fais are measures designed to evaluate psycholegal abilities rather than the psychological constructs measured by traditional psychological tests . fais make forensic assessments more systematic and assist evaluators in collecting important and relevant information by following the decision making process required under the law . since the term was coined , a number of assessment instruments have been developed that are designed to work in this way , and it appears that the use of fais has been increasing . this trend is encouraging in that empirical data suggest that trained examiners using fais achieve the highest levels of interexaminer and examiner adjudication agreement . before turning to a review of specific assessment methods , we provide a brief overview of the legal procedures involved in competency based questions . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . laws regarding competency vary from state to state , although most jurisdictions follow procedures similar to the overview we describe in this section . clinicians should consult the statute for the specific law and procedures applicable in their state . the issue of competency may be raised at any point in the adjudication process . if a court determines that a bona fide doubt exists as to a defendant competency , it must consider this issue formally , usually via a forensic evaluation , which can take place , as noted , while the defendant is in the community , in jail , or in another institutional setting . one legal issue that may concern evaluators is whether information obtained in a competency evaluation can be used against a defendant during the guilt phase of a trial or at sentencing . although concerns regarding self incrimination have been raised , all jurisdictions in the united states and canada provide , either statutorily or through case law , that information obtained in a competency evaluation can not be used in the context of a defendant guilt unless the defendant places his or her mental state into evidence at either the trial or the sentencing hearings . once a competency evaluation has been completed and the written report has been submitted , the court may schedule a hearing . if both defense and prosecution accept the findings and recommendations in the report , however , a hearing does not have to take place . as such , it is likely that , in the majority of cases , a formal hearing is not held . if a hearing is held , the evaluators may be asked to testify , but most hearings are quite brief , and usually only the written report of an evaluator is used . the ultimate decision about competency rests with the court , which is not bound by the evaluators recommendations . in most cases , however , the court accepts the recommendations of the evaluators . at this point , defendants adjudicated competent proceed with their cases . for defendants found incompetent , their trials are postponed until their competency is regained or the charges are dismissed , usually without prejudice . the disposition of incompetent defendants is perhaps the most problematic aspect of this area of law . until the case of jackson indiana , virtually all states allowed for the automatic and indefinite commitment of incompetent defendants . in jackson , however , the united states supreme court held that defendants committed solely on the basis of incompetency can not be held more than the reasonable period of time necessary to determine whether there is a substantial probability that he will attain that capacity in the foreseeable future . the court did not specify how long a period of time would be reasonable , nor did it indicate how progress toward the goal of regaining competency could be assessed . the jackson decision led to revisions in state statutes that provided alternatives to commitment and limited the length of commitment . the duration of confinement varies from state to state ; some states have specific time limits while others are based on a proportion of the length of sentence that would have been given if the defendant were convicted . medication is the most common form of treatment provided to restore defendants competence , although some jurisdictions have established psychoeducational programs designed to increase defendants understanding of the legal process or to confront problems that hinder a defendant ability to participate in the defense . what happens if an incompetent defendant refuses treatment , particularly medications ? the united states supreme court case provided at least a partial answer to this question . in sell united states , the supreme court considered the case of charles sell , a dentist who was charged with multiple counts of insurance fraud and who was deemed incompetent and committed for treatment at a federal medical center . sell refused medication , and the treatment staff subsequently sought to have him involuntarily medicated . the medical center review panels concluded that sell was mentally ill and dangerous , that medication would be helpful in reducing his symptoms , and that medication would also help restore his competence to stand trial . sell appealed , and the federal magistrate who had ordered sell commitment supported the government position that medication was the best treatment alternative to address the issue of his dangerousness and also to restore his competency . the supreme court held that antipsychotic drugs could be administered against a defendant will for the purpose of restoring competency , but only in limited circumstances . the court noted that this applied only to the issue of competency restoration , and indicated that medication could be justified on other grounds , including dangerousness . writing for the majority , justice breyer identified several factors that must be satisfied before a defendant can be involuntarily medicated . these include a determination that the medication is likely to restore competence but will not result in side effects that might affect a defendant ability to assist counsel . the court must also find that alternative and less intrusive methods that would achieve the same result are not available . the sell decision may have limited the use of medication as an option for some incompetent defendants who refuse voluntary treatment . indeed , justice breyer commented that he thought that instances of forced medication might be rare . as a consequence , the sell case may result in a greater emphasis being placed on the development of alternative forms of treatment for restoring competence . this brief overview of competency procedures is intended to provide a basic understanding of the process . for a more comprehensive discussion of the legal issues involved and a review of empirical research on the various aspects of the competency procedures , the reader is referred to reviews by pirelli , gottdiener , and zapf and by zapf and roesch . assessing competency . although there has been some confusion over the definition of the term competency , there is generally a high level of agreement among evaluators regarding a defendant competence . researchers who have investigated interrater reliability generally report that pairs of evaluators agree in up to eighty percent or more of the cases . gowensmith , murrie , and boccaccini published findings from a study conducted with a sample of two hundred and sixteen hawaiian cases and found slightly lower agreement rates ; they found seventy one percent agreement among examiners in initial competency evaluations and sixty one percent agreement in cases pertaining to competency restoration . murrie and colleagues found great variability in levels of agreement , which they attributed to evaluator , system , and policylevel factors . when evaluators are highly trained and use semistructured competence assessment instruments , however , high rates of agreement have been reported . when base rates of findings of competency are considered , these high levels of agreement are less impressive , and they do not suggest that evaluators are necessarily in agreement about the specific criteria involved in a determination of competency . in their recently published metaanalysis , pirelli , gottdiener , and zapf found the base rate of incompetency to be twenty seven percent in a total sample of over twenty pretrial defendants referred for such evaluations . thus , examiners , without even directly assessing a group of defendants , could achieve high levels of agreement with an examining clinician simply by deeming all defendants competent . because in most jurisdictions more than seventy percent of all referred defendants are adjudicated competent , the psychologist and the examiner would achieve at least modest agreement , even without making any further decisions . skeem and her colleagues demonstrated that examiner agreement on specific psycholegal deficits averaged only twenty five percent across a series of competency domains . it is the more difficult decisions , involving cases where competency is truly a serious question , that are of greatest concern . how reliable are decisions about these cases ? one study used a vignette methodology to determine whether examiners would distinguish between three different standards for competency . results of this study indicated that examiners were almost equally divided in their opinions regarding the defendant competence when applying dusky rational understanding standard : forty seven percent found the defendant competent and fifty two percent found the defendant incompetent . similar results were found for the rational manner standard and the standard that did not use the word rational . these authors felt that the nearly equally divided response to the same vignette was shocking and concluded that the defendant fate depends only on who performs the evaluation . high levels of reliability do not , of course , ensure that valid decisions are being made . two evaluators could agree that the presence of psychosis automatically leads to a finding of incompetency . as long as the evaluators are in agreement about their criteria for determining psychosis , the reliability of their final judgments about competency would be high . as we suggest throughout this chapter , it is quite possible that too many evaluators inappropriately rely on traditional mental status issues without considering the functional aspects of a particular defendant case . for these reasons , there is no correct decision against which to compare judgments . as we have indicated , the courts usually accept mental health professionals judgments about competency . does this mean that the judgments are valid ? short of a provisional trial , it may be possible to address the validity issue by having independent experts evaluate the information provided by evaluators and other collateral information sources . functional evaluation approach . we believe the most reasonable approach to the assessment of competency is based on a functional evaluation of a defendant ability matched to the contextualized demands of the case . although an assessment of the mental status of a defendant is important , it is not sufficient as a method of evaluating competency . rather , the mental status information must be related to the specific demands of the legal case , as has been suggested by legal decisions , such as the ones involving amnesia . finally , in a maryland decision , the court held that , because of the potential for fraud , amnesia does not justify a finding of incompetence . the court also stated that everyone has amnesia to some degree , because the passage of time erodes memory . the functional approach is illustrated in the famous amnesia case of wilson united states . in that decision , the court of appeals held that six factors should be considered in determining whether a defendant amnesia impaired the ability to stand trial : the extent to which the amnesia affected the defendant ability to consult with and assist his lawyer . the extent to which the amnesia affected the defendant ability to testify in his own behalf . if this were done , the evaluation of competency certainly would be one based on a determination of the manner in which a defendant incapacity may affect the legal proceedings . in fact , some state codes , such as florida and utah code , already specify that the evaluators must relate a defendant mental condition to clearly defined legal factors , such as the defendant appreciation of the charges , the range and nature of possible penalties , and capacity to disclose to an attorney the pertinent facts surrounding the alleged offense . one of the first was a checklist developed by robey that focused on court process related issues , such as understanding of the legal process . another early procedure , developed by bukatman , foy , and de grazia , used a checklist and a set of interview questions . neither of these early measures was used often . undoubtedly , a . louis mcgarry and his colleagues at the harvard medical school laboratory of community psychiatry had the greatest early influence on the formal assessment of competency . mcgarry , a psychiatrist , was involved in the development of two measures : the competency screening test and the competency assessment instrument . we next discuss these measures in addition to a number of other measures that have since been developed . competency screening test . the competency screening test was created by lipsitt as a screening measure to identify clearly competent defendants and minimize the need for lengthy institutional evaluations . such a screening process was considered important because the vast majority of defendants referred for evaluations are competent . the high rate of competency is that many other factors influence referrals , including the use of the evaluation commitment as a method for denying bail , as a tactical maneuver to delay a trial , as a way of providing a basis for a reduction in charges or sentences , and as a means of getting defendants who are seen as in need of mental health treatment out of jails and into hospitals . mumley , tillbrook , and grisso referred to this as the subversion hypothesis ; that is , using competency evaluations in a backdoor manner to provide defendants with treatment . the cst , however , has seldom been used as a screening device because of various validity related concerns . it has served as the basis for other subsequently developed forensic assessment instruments . the items include appraisal of available legal defenses , quality of relating to attorney , and capacity to disclose pertinent facts . each item is scored on a five point scale , ranging from total incapacity to no incapacity . the cai manual includes clinical examples of levels of incapacity as well as suggested interview questions . the cai has been used in a number of jurisdictions , although perhaps more as an interview structuring device rather than the two stage screening manner as originally intended by mcgarry . in its current form , the interdisciplinary fitness interview revised taps into thirty one relatively specific psycholegal abilities organized across eleven global domains . the ifir was developed on the original model used by golding but was altered to reflect a decade of experience , numerous court opinions , and the accumulated professional literature on competency assessments . for example , it specifically addresses the issue of the iatrogenic effects of psychotropic medications , a defendant decisional competency to engage in rational choice about trial strategies , proceeding pro se , or pleading guilty and competency to confess . it was developed to mirror utah articulated competency code , which mandates that examiners address its eleven global domains . a revised and comprehensive training manual is available . the scoring system has been changed to a threepoint scale , with a score of two meaning definite or serious impairment , one meaning possible or mild impairment , and zero meaning no impairment . the items on the fitr were developed to parallel the standards for fitness that were established in section two of the nineteen ninety two revision of the criminal code of canada , which are quite similar to the standards articulated by the united states supreme court in dusky united states . the first section assesses the defendant understanding of the arrest process ; the nature and severity of current charges ; and the role of key players , legal processes , pleas , and court procedure . the second section assesses the defendant appreciation of the range and nature of possible penalties , appraisal of available legal defenses , and appraisal of likely outcomes . the final section assesses the defendant capacity to communicate facts to the lawyer , relate to the lawyer , plan legal strategy , engage in his or her own defense , challenge prosecution witnesses , testify relevantly , and manage courtroom behavior . the fitr has demonstrated excellent utility as a screening instrument in research studies . zapf and roesch compared the results of the fitr and an institution based fitness assessment for fifty seven defendants remanded to an inpatient psychiatric institution for an evaluation of fitness . when specific decision rules were used to classify defendants as either fit or unfit , the fitr correctly predicted fitness status for forty nine of the fifty seven individuals . the remaining eight individuals were judged to be unfit by the fitr and fit as a result of the inpatient assessment . viljoen , roesch , and zapf found that the average interrater reliability of the fitr for overall determination of fitness was ninety eight8 . reliability for the sections was lower and ranged from fifty four to seventy for groups of raters . to investigate the predictive validity of the fitr , zapf compared decisions made by the fitr to decisions made in an institution based evaluation of fitness in several samples . in the first sample , the overall rate of agreement between the fitr and institution based judgments was eighty seven percent , and the false negative error rate was two percent . the second sample yielded comparable results . research on the gcctmsh has indicated that this instrument displays strong reliability and validity evidence . three factors identified by nicholson courtroom layout , general legal knowledge , and specific legal knowledge were later replicated by bagby . it was later suggested that this three factor solution may be appropriate only for defendants who have been ordered to undergo assessment at the pretrial stage . for each of the three sections , internal consistency ranged from eighty one to eighty eight , and interrater reliability ranged from very good to excellent . otto and colleagues reported that additional support for the construct validity of the maccatca was found in the pattern of correlations between the maccatca measures and select clinical variables . maccatca understanding , reasoning , and appreciation scores correlated with estimated wechsler adult intelligence scale revised full scale iq scores , and with brief psychiatric rating scale total scores . the three maccatca scales correlated moderately with clinicians global ratings of competency . evaluation of competency to stand trial revised . the evaluation of competency to stand trial revised was developed to structure an examiner judgments about a defendant competence related abilities and to provide normative data in this regard . the ecstr represents the first formal competency assessment instrument created specifically to serve , in part , as a screener of feigned incompetency and consists of four scales . the cc scale is composed of ten questions with five criteria rated on a five point scale , wherein zero equal not observed ; one equal questionable clinical significance ; two equal mild impairment ; three equal moderate impairment , unrelated competency ; and four equal severe impairment , directly related to competency . some of these items have more than one component to rate , and the highest score given is used toward the total scale score . the fu scale consists of fifteen questions with thirteen criteria . with one exception , items are rated on a five point scale , wherein zero equal correct , one equal correct when prompted , two equal correct with attempts to educate , three equal wrong despite attempts to educate , and four equal grossly psychotic and totally unrelated to the question . the exception is coded either zero equal understands risk of talking to prosecutor or one equal does not understand risk . this section examines some of the issues relevant to the assessment of competence for these special populations , including descriptions of instruments that have been developed to assess competence related abilities within these populations . relatively few researchers and scholars have addressed the problems faced by individuals diagnosed with intellectual disabilities within the criminal justice system . bonnie noted that one of the biggest problems for these individuals is under identification . that is , persons diagnosed with mr are often compliant and cooperative with authority figures , such as judges or lawyers , and are likely to pretend to understand their lawyers when , in fact , they may not . research by everington , notariosmull , and horton suggests that defendants diagnosed with mr may be able to hide their deficits in certain circumstances . nevertheless , in many cases , a cloak of competence gives these individuals the appearance of normalcy in the competency context . legally significant impairments then become visible only when the individual also has a severe mental illness or acts in a strange or disruptive manner . once individuals diagnosed with mr have been identified , it is important that an examiner who is familiar with the specific issues relevant to the diagnosis conduct the evaluation . petrella noted that the probability of an adequate evaluation of issues involving such a diagnosis is highly unlikely for several reasons , including the fact that many evaluators are not qualified to administer intelligence tests , evaluators may have minimal experience with mr and limited exposure to the unique clinical presentation of individuals with such a diagnosis , referrals to professionals and experts in the area of intellectual disability per se seldom occur , and professionals with specific expertise with such persons usually have minimal or no experience with forensic issues . research examining the rates of incompetence among defendants with mr has provided conflicting findings . in missouri , seventeen percent of defendants referred for competence evaluations and diagnosed with mr were adjudicated incompetent whereas in connecticut and michigan , rates of incompetence were reported to be twelve percent and thirty three percent , respectively . in addition , the probability of being found incompetent also varies by severity of the defendant intellectual limitations . in recent years , there has been a move toward the development of competence assessment instruments for specialized populations of defendants , such as defendants diagnosed with mr or juvenile defendants . next we briefly describe some of the recent advances in these areas . competence assessment for standing trial for defendants with mental retardation . everington developed an instrument designed to assess competence with defendants diagnosed with mr called the competence assessment for standing trial for defendants with mental retardation . the items of the castmr were derived from a review of relevant literature , case law , and existing competency to stand trial assessment instruments . the castmr consists of fifty questions , which are administered orally to the defendant . the questions are divided into three sections that address the basic elements of the dusky standard . section i , basic legal concepts , includes twenty five multiple choice items that address concepts related to the criminal trial process and terms that are critical to the trial process . the authors of this instrument conducted two validation studies to investigate the psychometric properties of the castmr . interrater reliability for section iii was estimated between eighty percent and eighty seven percent . juvenile measures of competency . the juvenile adjudicative competence interview is an interview guide for clinicians that provides standardized questions to assist in the evaluation of developmentally sensitive information relevant to competency to stand trial for juveniles . respondents are to choose among various options and are asked to recommend a best and worst choice for the person in the vignette . research studies have been conducted using the macjen ; however , it is not available for use in clinical settings . we conclude our chapter with a discussion of several issues to which examiners must pay special attention when conducting an evaluation of competency . prior to interviewing a defendant , it is good clinical practice to speak with the defense attorneys to determine as accurately as possible why the fitness issue was raised , what evidence was offered , and which trial and dispositional alternatives are being considered by both parties . all indications of prior mental health contacts should be pursued before the interview takes place so that the examiner has as complete a set of mental health records as possible . finally , the examiner should maintain an accurate record of when , where , and how information about the defendant was made available as well as a date and time record of all contacts with the defendant , attorneys , other mental health professionals , and other collateral informants . these records are invaluable at later stages if legal tactics designed to confuse or mislead a witness are attempted . having prepared for an examination in this fashion , one can conduct an efficient and comprehensive interview in a relatively brief period of time . most delays in conducting an evaluation and , therefore , time spent on inpatient status can be largely avoided , and a more relevant examination conducted , if these steps are taken . prior to the interview , the defendant should be provided with proper informed consent or notification , including being informed about the parameters of confidentiality . the current competency statutes in illinois , florida , and utah are in many ways models of this developing trend , insofar as they require examiners to identify the factual bases for their conclusions and opinions , describe the defendant mental and physical disabilities and how these may impair his or her ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the defense , discuss the likelihood that the defendant will respond to a specified course of treatment , and explain procedures that would be employed to compensate for the defendant disabilities , if applicable . we applaud this sort of specification and urge examiners to adopt the practice , even if it is not mandated in their own jurisdiction . competency evaluations and the associated reports prepared for the court should be completed in accordance with both the spirit and the letter of the law . the examiner must be thoroughly acquainted with the legal literature and in some sense anticipate developments in one practice . many states mirror this in their statutes but do not regulate the common practice of requesting competency and insanity evaluations at the same time , often resulting in a combined report . we believe this practice is improper , and recommend that separate interviews , with distinct reports , be prepared when possible . for a comprehensive review of empirical research on competence to stand trial , the reader is referred to grisso , cooper and grisso , and mumley . these authors reviewed the research on the evaluation of competence in three to five years intervals . as well , pirelli , gottdiener and zapf conducted a meta analysis using sixty eight studies and over twenty defendants that provides a quantitative review of the comparative research on competence . pirelli , zapf and gottdiener set forth a number of guidelines intended to serve as a reference for those conducting research in this area . an overview of the empirical developments regarding criminal responsibility , including research on not guilty by reason of insanity verdicts , judicial instruction , and jury decision making . as it is impossible to provide a comprehensive review in one chapter , the interested reader is also referred to additional resources for an indepth understanding of this topic area . insanity standards and the construal of criminal responsibility . the classical formulation of this moral presupposition is the legal maxim actus non facit reum , nisi mens sit rea , which translates freely into modern english as an act is not legally cognizable as evil , and hence criminally punishable , unless it is committed by a person who has the capacity to cognize the act as evil and then freely chooses to do it . this fundamental belief goes to the heart of the tension in the public mind , as well as in criminal and civil law , between strict or objective liability , on one hand , and subjective liability , on the other . an examination of the history of the criminal law in western judeochristian cultures clearly demonstrates the nature of this tension . the dilemma is simply this : on one hand , it is clear that , when someone performs a heinous or reprehensible act , he or she is guilty in the common sense meaning of that term . we will not attempt to address the moral question about the insanity defense whether it should exist or not . platt and diamond , for example , quoted the babylonian talmud as observing that deafmute , an idiot and a minor are awkward to deal with , as he who injures them is liable , whereas if they injure others they are exempt . children ages seven to twelve were presumed doli incapax unless evidence of capacity to form culpable intention was presented . interestingly , the pattern of evidence most frequently adduced to infer such intentionality , such as lying about the crime , concealing the body , or other such after the fact actions , is still used in modern insanity trials as evidence that the person was capable of the prerequisite intentionality at the time of the crime . the culmination of this doctrine in more modern jurisprudence is presented in blackstone commentaries in its classic form : all the several pleas and excuses , which protect the committer of a forbidden act from the punishment which is otherwise annexed thereto , may be reduced to this single consideration , the want or defect of will . an involuntary act , as it has no claim to merit , so neither can it induce any guilt : the concurrence of the will , when it has its choice either to do or to avoid the fact in question , being the only thing that renders human actions either praiseworthy or culpable . indeed , to make a complete crime , cognizable by human laws , there must be both a will and an act . for the rule of law as to . in fact , in sayre classic review of mens rea , it was argued that the tradition of criminal law in england dating back to henry i originated in theological opposition to secular laws of absolute responsibility . platt and diamond showed in their historical reviews that the furiously insane have been exempted from moral sanction by an extension of the same logic . whereas mens rea has been historically interpreted in a broad fashion , making it roughly synonymous with culpable intentionality or with the general mental and emotional capacity prerequisite to choose freely to commit proscribed acts , the modern trend in criminal law has been to interpret the mens rea requirement of criminal conduct more narrowly and equate it with such phrases as proscribed conduct performed intentionally , recklessly , knowingly , or purposefully . discomfort with the insanity defense sometimes has resulted in attempts to either abolish it outright or to change it drastically by restricting the relevance of mental state to such a narrowly defined mens rea . wales argued that the cases most likely to be acted on differently are those involving command hallucinations , delusions , and paranoid processes , where it is clear that the defendant acted knowingly in the narrow sense of the term , but that the knowingness was dependent on delusional , hallucinatory , or otherwise psychotic belief systems . finally , some states continue to experiment with varying levels of abolition . in two thousand and four , idaho effectively abolished an insanity defense through statutes providing that mental condition shall not be a defense to any charge of criminal conduct . a writ of certiorari was recently denied in delling idaho , thus leaving unanswered the question of whether the us constitution permits a state to abolish the insanity defense in criminal cases . however , it is reasonably clear that the knowledge test had already been used implicitly and explicitly in a series of trials in both england and the united states . in fact , there was already considerable discomfort with the perceived narrow scope of the rule . in eighteen sixty six , justice somerville made this logic explicit in the ruling set forth in parsons state : if therefore , it be true , as a matter of fact , that the disease of insanity can . so affect the mind as to subvert the freedom of the will , and thereby destroy the power of the victim to choose between right and wrong , although he perceived it by which we mean the power of volition to adhere in action to the right and abstain from wrong is such a one criminally responsible for an act done under the influence of such a controlling disease ? we clearly think not . in nineteen twenty four , crotty documented that the jurisdictions in the united states were fragmented into four sets of rules : relatively pure naghten standard ; the naghten standard broadened by interpretation to include irresistible impulse as meeting the test ; the naghten standard supplemented by explicit irresistible impulse rules ; and the new hampshire product rule , heavily influenced by isaac ray and set forth in state pike . justice doe , in setting forth new hampshire product test , argued that it was a matter of legal fact , to be decided by a judge or jury , whether a defendant suffered from a disease of the mind and whether the proscribed behavior was a product of that disease . rosenberg scholarly analysis drew out these issues in fine detail , documenting public , legislative , and psychiatric reactions that are reminiscent of the current debate . judge cox highly elaborate instructions to the jury in guiteau trial left little doubt that the central issue before the jury concerned whether the alleged moral insanity and irresistible impulse fit into a straightforward interpretation of the right or wrong test outlined in naghten . controversy surrounding various definitional and procedural aspects of the insanity defense continued over the first half of the twentieth century . in nineteen fifty four , judge bazelon of the district of columbia court of appeals attempted to correct numerous deficiencies in the combined right or wrong impulse test in durham united states , combined irresistible impulse test in durham united states , wherein the proposed standard was that an accused be considered not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was the product of mental disease or defect . second , the older test forced expert witnesses to testify in uncomfortably narrow terms of right or wrong , making it impossible to convey to the judge and jury the full range of information material to an assessment of defendant responsibility . although it has been asserted that the test need not be narrowly cognitive and could include a wider range of affective knowledge and appreciation if interpreted in the context of a proper jurisprudential and historical perspective , the concern of the durham court was that this was not typical practice and , therefore , needed to be corrected . although the durham product test was intended to remedy these problems , it was not perceived as having its intended effect and seemed instead to lead to the undue dominance of experts testifying in conclusory terms . for judge bazelon , the purpose of the reformulation should have been to ask the psychiatrist a single question : what is the nature of the impairment of the defendant mental and emotional processes and behavioral controls ? leaving for the jury the question of whether that impairment is sufficient to relieve the defendant of responsibility for the particular act charged . advocates of this alteration have included the american bar association and the american psychiatric association ; this proposed alteration was adopted into the federal code by the united states congress in the insanity defense reform act . the court of appeals for the fifth circuit has agreed with this abolition of the volitional prong , arguing that the position of the american psychiatric association , that the profession did not possess sufficiently accurate scientific bases to measure a person capacity for selfcontrol , was persuasive . the dissenters also could have included rogers , bloom , and manson finding that personality disordered defendants , the target of the advocates of abolishing the volitional prong , constituted only eighteen percent of a group of successful insanity acquittees . citing united states torniero , where the second circuit placed appropriate limits on creative uses of the volitional prong for new personality disorders by requiring the defense to show that respected authorities in the field share the view that the disorder is a disease or defect that could have impaired the defendant ability to desist from the offense charged , the dissenters argued that the volitional prong was an essential aspect of the concept of guilt , because this concept presuppose a morally responsible agent to whom guilt can be attributed . by definition , guilt can not be attributed to an individual unable to refrain from violating the law . delaware , illinois , indiana , and maine have adopted the ali cognitive prong only , and new york and the us federal system utilize the cognitive prong only , but as a variant of both the naghten and ali standards . the guilty but mentally ill verdict . as of two thousand , twenty states had provisions that allow for a defendant to be found gbmi , and utah uses the terminology guilty and mentally ill . the original gbmi legislation employed in the twentieth century was introduced in michigan in nineteen seventy five in the context of people mcquillan , a case that found michigan automatic commitment of ngri acquittee unconstitutional . the verdict was also adopted in indiana in nineteen seventy nine under similar circumstances . in underwood , judge campbell of the michigan supreme court expressed his sympathies with the abolitionist argument . he acknowledged outrage in response to the absurd lengths to which the defense of insanity has been allowed to go under the fanciful theories of incompetent and dogmatic witnesses , but he believed that the remedy was to be found elsewhere : no doubt many criminals have escaped justice by the weight foolishly given by credulous jurors to evidence which their common sense should have disregarded . but the remedy is to be sought by correcting false notions , and not by destroying the safeguards of private liberty . of course , they did not mention that few , if any , new funds were to be appropriated to the prison system to provide more treatment and that provisions already existed in every state that passed gbmi to laterally transfer a disturbed prisoner to a psychiatric facility for treatment if deemed necessary . in addition , even without the defense , the state is required by the united states constitution to provide basic services to its inmates , and this legislation guaranteed nothing more . in addition , we include a section on the role of delusions in evaluations of criminal responsibility , because the nature and quality of a defendant thought process is often central in determining the extent of impairment in mental state at the time of the offense , particularly in contested cases . inception . in addition to rapport building , the inception relates to informed consent or notification , such that it requires clearly explaining one role to the defendant , focusing on why he or she is being evaluated , who will have access to the information gathered , and what limits are placed on the confidentiality of information . these confidentiality rules vary widely across jurisdictions and are strongly influenced by the context of the case ; therefore , the examiner must be fully informed in this regard , as a matter of professional competence . near the end of the interview , the examiner may choose to introduce contradictory evidence in an effort to observe the defendant reaction , evaluate the defendant response style , and determine whether he or she is consciously distorting facts or experiencing bona fide memory related difficulties . reconnaissance . this is a forensically oriented review of the defendant history . it is important to obtain information regarding the defendant history of psychiatric disturbance , treatments received , and general experience of his or her psychiatric condition . of particular importance are prior episodes that may have involved criminal charges and competency evaluations , civil commitments , or other such dispositions . the pattern of mental state disturbance , its relationship to psychotherapeutic and psychopharmacological treatment , medical conditions , situational stressors , and substance use are particularly important . detailed inquiries present mental state and mental state at offense . within the context of mso evaluations , defendants are likely to have been treated with psychotropic medications for a long time period following the alleged incident but prior to the evaluation . this can be problematic as the defendant ability to recall and describe his or her prior mental state accurately is potentially impaired . the defendant must be asked to reconstruct his or her thoughts , perceptions , experiences , attitudes , and behavior , as well as those in the field of action during the entire legally significant period . retrospective evaluations present challenges for laypersons , jurors , judges , and examiners alike ; therefore , great care must be taken to obtain detailed information and also to avoid , as much as possible , recallbased contamination of the defendant memories . reconciliation and termination . thus , at the reconciliation or termination phase , the examiner should be prepared to integrate the information available at this level and to inform all parties concerned , including , as appropriate , the defendant , defense counsel , prosecutor , and other mental health professionals . one advantage of this openness is that it allows the defendant to produce any additional information that might explain or clarify discrepancies , and it also helps prevent an uninformed battle of the experts . in certain grayarea cases , there may be legitimate disagreements among experts . mental state at the time of offense screening evaluation . the mental state at the time of the offense screening evaluation is a semistructured interview technique developed to screen out defendants for whom an insanity defense is clearly not applicable . although there have not been any published studies of the reliability of the mse , its validity was evaluated by slobogin and colleagues . their decisions were then compared to the decisions of an inpatient forensic evaluation team , which included one psychiatrist , one psychologist , and one social worker . overall , there was satisfactory agreement between trainees and the evaluation team . there was forty four percent agreement on the cases that were screened out . using the decisions made by the evaluation team as the criterion , the decisions made by the trainees were found to have a zero percent false negative rate and a twenty eight percent false positive rate . the rogers criminal responsibility assessment scales were designed to quantify the elements of the ali criteria for criminal nonresponsibility ; however , rogers noted that it might be applicable to the naughten standard as well . in addition , there is a series of more global ratings on final judgments of insanity and impairment . thus , the rcras is an instrument that reflects the relative importance assigned by examiners to the firstorder elements of an insanity decision . it should be noted that these elements are fairly abstract psychological and legal terms and do not necessarily represent the cues that are actually utilized by professional examiners in making their decisions . this was a major issue of contention among rogers , melton , petrila , poythress and slogobin , and golding in the evaluation of this instrument . rogers believes it is important to quantify the issue ; however , it would be unfair to assume that he did not recognize the value of qualitative data . golding and melton agreed that quantification is essentially illusory at this stage in the development of evaluations of criminal responsibility . both groups of authors agree , in large measure , on the domains or conceptual elements to be addressed . rogers and sewell responded to the criticisms of melton by attempting to extend the rcras construct validity via the reanalysis of two data sets to address contributions of individual variables to the various components of the decision model . on the basis of discriminant function analysis , the authors concluded that the rcras variables were able to form differentiating patterns for each of the five components of the decision model . results indicated average hit rates of ninety four percent , and the average variance accounted for was sixty three percent . factor analysis of the rcras items has resulted in three factors bizarre behavior , high activity , and high anxiety that do not mirror the five scales . unfortunately , all studies in this area appear to use criterion contaminated groups , because the examination process was part of the judicial determination . a number of proposals for semistructured protocols to assist in the evaluation of mental state at time of the offense have been made . they share in common an open ended structure , with special attention to developing multisource data , identification of legally and psychologically relevant dimensions of the criminal responsibility evaluation , and disclosure of the logical links in an evaluator reasoning . the need to develop such a comprehensive analysis is clear . forensic evaluators need to pay close attention to crime scene data as well as to more traditional sources of third party information . all such sources need to be integrated in as straightforward a manner as possible . where limited scientific data exist to support the inference , they should be referenced , and where otherwise indicated , the evaluator logical link analysis should be presented and scrutinized . as melton noted , the role of the forensic evaluator is not to conclusively resolve all conflicting accounts about the case but rather to conduct an evaluation that can be scrutinized in terms of all available evidence , both psychological and behavioral . modern forensic standards of practice are to address the issue of the consistency of behavioral crime scene evidence with psycholegal formulations and allow the trier of fact to make the determination of their significance , guided by whatever scientific evidence can be directly or indirectly adduced . role of delusions in assessment of criminal responsibility . the nature and quality of a defendant delusions are central in determining the extent of impairment impacting his or her mso . several issues are involved . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . similarly , in an interviewbased study , taylor found that forty percent of psychotic defendants reported acting directly on their delusions during their offenses . the frequency of nonpathological but radical religious and political beliefs , and the extent of the relationship between these beliefs and violence , have not been systematically studied ; however , defendants whose criminal acts are related to such fervently held beliefs are clearly plausible candidates for mso evaluations wherein a primary focus will be the determination of whether these extreme beliefs are delusional . distinguishing between radical beliefs and delusions is a difficult , but critical , task in the assessment of criminal responsibility . respecting the principles of autonomy and selfdetermination , our legal system holds responsible the extremist who chooses to act on a radical system of beliefs , expressing his or her desires , values , and personhood through the crime . the basic moral logic of the insanity defense , however , excuses the mentally disordered individual who acts on a pathological , uncontrollable belief system that distorts his or her sense of reality , thereby impairing the capacity for rational choice . there is no bright line of demarcation between extreme beliefs and delusions . moreover , religious and political belief systems that reference nonphysical entities and events are not scientifically testable ; consequently , there is no full standard of truth independent of what the says . for these reasons , in this section we review recent progress in defining and assessing delusions and their likely consequences . the purpose of this section is to introduce readers to the complex issues involved in assessing delusions and in conducting informed assessments of defendants beliefs in the context of insanity evaluations . emphasis is placed on issues relevant to distinguishing between extreme religious or political beliefs and delusions . similarly , it is difficult to evaluate the incredibility or implausibility of beliefs , because clinicians may not agree on the extent to which certain beliefs are bizarre . the degree of conviction with which a belief is held also does not clearly distinguish between those that are delusional and nondelusional . most current attempts to systematically analyze delusions are based on the seminal work of jaspers , who provided the most comprehensive , enduring , and clinically useful theory for distinguishing among various categories of delusional and nondelusional beliefs . a simplified summary of this theory focused on differentiating delusional from nondelusional beliefs is presented here . jaspers argued that the criteria of level of conviction , imperviousness to counterargument , and impossibility or bizarreness were insufficient external criteria that did not capture the essence of delusionality . rather , overvalued beliefs , or even delusionlike ideas , could be distinguished from primary delusions , based on jaspers approach , by attention to three fundamental criteria : primary delusions are distinguished from secondary delusions and beliefs that are merely overvalued based on the extent and nature of their ununderstandability . thus , whereas overvalued ideas have clear precedent in an individual existing personality and meaningful life events , secondary delusions emerge from other psychopathological experiences , and primary delusions fundamentally change an individual personality or way of looking at the world . although jaspers classification has not been subject to much empirical research and can be criticized for relying too heavily on the subjective criterion of understandability , his theory provides useful guidance in conceptualizing the key distinctions between delusions and overvalued ideas . issues in the treatment and release of insanity acquittees . inherent in the decision to find a defendant not guilty by reason of insanity is concern about the ultimate disposition of such acquittees . jurors place a great deal of emphasis on this issue in their deliberations . in shannon united states , the supreme court held that ngri defendants have no right to a jury instruction that explains the post acquittal commitment process , because such an instruction would violate the longstanding principle that a jury must base its verdict on the evidence with which it was presented . a recent case in maine returned a comparable holding . in state okie , the supreme judicial court of maine ruled that jury instructions needed to be accurate with respect to the law but that it was not appropriate to inform the jury of the consequences of an insanity verdict . the court holding was based on legal precedent or historical precedent , which is in line with federal law , and based on the fact that judges , not juries , impose sentences . although this may be correct jurisprudential theory , it violates common sense justice , in that we have strong reason to believe that jurors do pay attention to this issue and that these assumptions are incorrect . in fact , research indicates that they are more likely to remain institutionalized for longer periods of time than crime equivalent guilty persons . the constitutionality of this likelihood has been justified by the us supreme court on the grounds that the purpose of their commitment is to treat their dangerousness , not to punish them for a crime for which they were not culpable . where such problems in the therapeutic relationship exist , medications are frequently delusionally reinterpreted as the cause for psychotic symptoms . thus , the typical ngri admission has a history of unsuccessful treatment , the most recent treatment frequently occurring only months before the index offense . second , because one dangerousness is linked , by virtue of the plea , to his or her mental disorder , the person is unlikely to be released until he or she is deemed psychiatrically stable . in another study , mangunomire , thompson , bertmanpate , burnett , and thompson reviewed the records of ninety one insanity acquittees in a maximum security forensic hospital in louisiana and found that the psychopathy checklistrevised scores and age at which the subject committed the first criminal offense were related to release recommendations . third , political realities based on the sensational publicity produced by the media , in large part because they perpetuate insanity defense myths in failed ngri releases , make decision makers quite cautious . finally , few jurisdictions have an articulated prerelease risk assessment , postrelease risk management , and intensive case management system capable of more safely handling the community adjustment and supervision needed for such individuals . an unstudied aspect of the dispositional issue concerns the ultimate costs and effectiveness of placing prototypical insanity acquittees in forensic treatment contexts versus placement in traditional correctional facilities . although some data clearly support the monitored release of ngri acquittees , the trend , in those states with either gbmi or highly restricted insanity defenses , is to place such defendants in correctional environments for the majority of their sentence or institutionalization . wiederanders and golding and colleagues demonstrated that articulated follow up of insanity acquittees in the community is feasible and worthy of study . clearly , the cost per diem while initially incarcerated will favor prison over mental health system dispositions ; however , the analysis also needs to include days institutionalized and days in the community at lower cost as well as the likelihood and financial , emotional , and moral costs of recidivism . again , we know of no direct data , but , on logical grounds , we propose that treated and supervised mentally ill and dangerous offenders ultimately would cost less , financially and emotionally , than incarcerated mentally ill offenders who receive less mental health treatment and supervision . as is evident from this discussion , clinicians face a multitude of issues with respect to the assessment and disposition of ngri defendants . we now turn to a review of empirical research developments regarding many of these issues . empirical developments regarding criminal responsibility . we have conceptualized this research as falling into three broad areas : research on ngri verdicts , including the frequency of ngri verdicts , rates of agreement between experts as well as between experts and the courts with respect to ngri opinions , and the characteristics of ngri acquittees . the research has focused primarily on describing the ngri population in traditional demographic and diagnostic terms and at demythologizing public misconceptions of the insanity defense . frequency of ngri verdicts . these authors found an average rate of insanity pleas of eighty five per one hundred felony indictments and an aggregated success rate of twenty eight percent . silver and colleagues cited highly variable success rates , ranging from seven percent to eighty seven percent and averaging twenty six percent . cirincione and jacobs attempted to collect data on each state with respect to the annual number of insanity acquittals and , despite valiant efforts , were able to obtain data from only thirty six states . for these thirty six states , the mean number of insanity acquittals was thirty three per state per year , with a median of seventeen and a standard deviation of forty one california and florida had the highest average number of insanity acquittals per year , and new mexico and south dakota had the lowest , with six states reporting no more than one insanity acquittal per year . rates of agreement . there is a high rate of agreement among forensic experts with similar levels of training , experience , and methodology and high levels of agreement between examiner opinions and judge or juror decisions with respect to insanity opinions . research on the reliability of forensic judgments indicates that the types of cases likely to be contested include issues of an axis i diagnosis with a comorbid personality disorder diagnosis ; highly idiosyncratic and paranoid religious , political , or identity systems ; intoxication or failure to take medications ; and extremely bizarre conduct . ngri verdicts typically are achieved as either a stipulation between defense and prosecution or bench trials , and they rarely involve contested battles of experts in front of jurors . in theory , we would expect the same in ngri evaluations . similarly , we know of no empirical study of the crime characteristics that lead actual judicial decision makers or forensic examiners to conclude that the defendant lacked the legally or morally relevant mso . this point is particularly crucial , because few examiners , in our experience , pay close attention to collateral reports or crime scene data with respect to its consistency with their inferences about a defendant mental state . unfortunately , this type of sociodemographic research does not address the more theoretically interesting question of what types of mental disorder characteristics and what aspects of offense incident characteristics influence expert , judge , and juror decision making . callahan and silver studied the factors associated with the conditional release of ngri acquittees in four states and found great variance . in connecticut , few individuals were likely to be released conditionally , regardless of their characteristics . in new york , however , demographic characteristics were most predictive of conditional release : females , whites , and high school graduates were most likely to be conditionally released . those who committed homicide were less likely to have obtained conditional release as compared to ngri acquittees who committed other offenses , which the study authors believed was likely attributable to one or more of these issues : their symptoms may take longer to manage ; the gravity of their offenses results in more caution in release decisions , thereby requiring murder acquittees to demonstrate longer periods of behavioral and psychiatric stability ; and that admission to a more secure facility likely results in greater lengths of stay . revocation rates of conditional release vary widely . variables such as being white , employed , and married are indicative of successful conditional release . monson , gunnin , fogel and kyle examined the factors related to the revocation of conditional release in a sample of one hundred and twenty five ngri acquittees and found that minority status , criminal history , and a substance use diagnosis were significantly predictive of revocation of conditional release . vitacco investigated factors related to failure to maintain conditional release across all ngri acquittees in wisconsin over a fiveyear period . these researchers found that diagnosis of substance abuse , previous revocation of conditional release , and the experience of needing psychiatric hospitalization were all related to revocation of conditional release . in a followup study that focused on female insanity acquittees conditionally released to the community over a sevenyear period in wisconsin , vitacco found that fifty two of the females maintained their conditional release , whereas twenty four had it revoked due to rule violations or criminal behavior but not violent behavior . as suggested , the effects of language differences in legal standards for insanity have been intensely debated for over two centuries . the nature and outcome of these debates , however , have shown either weak or little practical effect on jurors . research repeatedly demonstrates that mock jurors often do not apply judicial instruction on various legal definitions of insanity in rendering verdicts . for example , the insanity defense reform act was formulated after john hinckley acquittal to narrow the language of the ali standard , with the intention of curbing the number of insanity verdicts . as diamond observed , many of the effects and their strength depend on the way the verdicts are formulated , the verdict alternatives , and the existence of contextual effects , for example . research on the gbmi verdict option indicates that mock jurors who opt for the gbmi verdict option tend to be more moderate in their ratings of deserved blame and punishment as well as in their ratings of a defendant level of mental disorder , capacity to display rational behavior , and capacity to control psychotic beliefs than mock jurors selecting ngri or guilty verdicts . poulson , wuensch , and brondino found that the addition of the gbmi verdict option resulted in a twofold effect : a reduction in guilty verdicts by about twothirds and a reduction of ngri verdicts by about onehalf . these authors concluded that the gbmi verdict appears to function as a compromise verdict . poulson and his colleagues found that mock jurors attitudes were reflected in their verdict selections . for example , jurors who opted for guilty verdicts held a crime control orientation , favorable attitudes toward the death penalty , and unfavorable attitudes toward the insanity defense . the opposite was true of those jurors who opted for an ngri verdict . research on judicial instructions has highlighted the importance of providing jurors with the opportunity to deliberate . wheatman and shaffer found that dispositional instructions had no effect on the verdict preferences of individual jurors ; however , after given the opportunity to deliberate as a jury , post deliberation shifts in mock jurors initial verdict preferences were evident . although the legal system implicitly assumes that people are blank slates who can apply the law in a wholly evidence based fashion , research indicates that people have knowledge structures that reflect their life experiences and guide their behavior . these knowledge structures include constructs such as attitudes , schemas , prototypes , and stereotypes , and they appear highly relevant to legal decision making . several sources of research suggest that individual differences in these structures are critical in understanding why jurors reach particular verdicts in insanity defense cases . for example , roberts , golding , and fincham found that , although seventy eight percent of their subjects believed that severe mental illness suggested impairment in one capacity to make rational decisions and form criminal intent , sixty six percent believed that insanity should not be allowed as a complete criminal defense . across studies , results reflect a primary concern that the insanity defense is an easily abused loophole in the law that allows many offenders to escape punishment . additional concerns include beliefs that insanity is easily feigned and that the public is poorly protected from dangerous criminals who are adjudicated insane . similarly , jurors casespecific negative attitudes toward both mental health experts and individuals with severe mental illness appear to affect their decision making in insanity defense cases . many of these concerns reflect inaccurate knowledge about the insanity defense . such myths are not only prevalent but may also be inflexible . jeffrey and pasewark presented participants with factual statistics on the frequency and success rate of the insanity defense . approximately half of the participants maintained their opinion that the insanity defense was overused and abused despite having seen contradictory evidence . for example , roberts and golding found that mock jurors attitudes toward the insanity defense were more strongly associated with their verdicts than were the study design variables , which included manipulations of available verdict categories and case facts . the most determinative dimension underlying these attitudes was mock jurors beliefs in strict liability . thus , jurors verdicts may depend more on their attitudes and opinions than on case facts and court instruction . despite strong evidence of the biasing effect of negative attitudes toward the insanity defense on verdicts , bias often may go undetected as a result of limitations in current knowledge and legal procedures . sloat and frierson found that only about four percent of their sample could correctly identify the definitions and dispositions of defendants found ngri and gbmi . despite the abundance of research on insanity defense attitudes , no wellvalidated measure of these attitudes has been developed . skeem and golding presented one of the first checklists of jurors conceptions that , they suggested , could be adapted into a questionnaire to assess prospective jurors conceptions of the typical person who is not responsible for his criminal actions due to mental illness . except in cases involving interracial violent crimes , capital punishment , or pretrial publicity , judges have broad discretion in selecting the topics to be addressed during voir dire . in our opinion , the voir dire process ideally would be reformed to allow for routine examination of prospective jurors caserelevant preconceptions and attitudes in insanity defense cases . jurors case construals . additional lines of research suggest that jurors views are critical . in addition to their casespecific attitudes , jurors individual ways of interpreting evidence are related to their verdicts . mock jurors draw different inferences about defendants cognitive and volitional impairments when given identical case descriptions . these inferences , in turn , strongly predict their verdicts . for example , roberts and golding presented mock jurors with case vignettes in which they manipulated available verdict categories , the relationship of the defendant paranoid delusion to the crime , and the planfulness of the crime . the attitude related ways in which mock jurors interpreted the case evidence were the most powerful predictors of verdict choice . for example , individual differences in jurors perceptions of the extent to which a defendant was mentally disordered , capable of rational behavior , capable of acting differently , or capable of understanding the wrongfulness of his or her behavior explained substantially more variance in verdicts than did the objective manipulation of case evidence . finkel and handel , using different methodology , also found that jurors actively construct the meaning of case information in rendering verdicts . they presented mock jurors with four vastly different case vignettes and asked them to render a verdict and explain the reasoning underlying their decisions . the pattern of the cited constructs or reasons systematically differed based on the mock jurors verdicts . in essence , then , jurors construed case information in complex , discriminating ways that were consistent with their verdict choices . similarly , whittemore and ogloff found that differences in mock jurors perceptions of a defendant mental state at the time of the trial predicted their verdicts . despite manipulation of the defendant mental state at the time of trial , mock jurors differed in their perceptions of the extent to which given defendants were mentally disordered . when mock jurors inferred that the defendant was psychotic at the time of the trial , they were more likely to conclude that the defendant was insane . jurors implicit theories or prototypes of insanity . thus , jurors construct the meaning of case information . however , the nature of these theories and the process by which they affect verdicts remains unclear . researchers who have examined the nature of mock jurors conceptions of insanity based on jurors judgments about insanity case vignettes have found somewhat conflicting results with respect to the relative importance of various construal dimensions . to date , studies that directly analyze what people mean by insane in the context of a consideration of actual jury decisions are virtually nonexistent : what everybody knows about insanity is perilously unchartered . finkel and colleagues conducted research examining jurors conceptions of insanity by using a prototype theory of categorization . finkel and groscup found that undergraduate subjects described insanity cases as involving young defendants with a history of strain , mental disorder , violence , and abuse who perpetrate various crimes , including murder , on strangers after various precipitating events . for successful insanity cases , the defendant motive is related to a grandiose delusion ; for unsuccessful cases , revenge is the motive . skeem and golding identified three prototypes of insanity that were systematically related to jurors caserelevant attitudes and demographic characteristics : severe mental disability , the prototype representing the majority of the jurors and characterized by an emphasis on severe , longstanding , functional impairment and intellectual disability that is resistant to treatment ; moral insanity , the prototype representing about one third of the jurors and characterized by an emphasis on traits of psychopathy , psychosis , and violent , unpredictable behavior ; and mental state centered , the prototype representing about one fifth of the jurors and characterized by a narrow focus on issues relevant to the defendant impaired mso . these prototypes were related to differences in the ways jurors interpreted case information and rendered verdicts , such that the jurors with mental state centered prototypes were more likely to render verdicts of ngri and more likely to perceive defendants as less worthy of punishment , less able to control their beliefs , and more mentally disordered . jurors decisions are not determined solely by subjective factors . although individual differences in social moral cognition appear most critical in understanding jurors verdicts , objective manipulation of case facts does have some impact on jurors verdicts . for example , the level of a defendant mental disorder and the planfulness and bizarreness of the crime are associated with jurors verdicts . as noted earlier , the characteristics of insanity acquittees suggest that juror and judicial decision making is rational and relatively consistent . in this chapter we provided a broad overview of a number of issues and considerations regarding empirical , legal and clinical aspects of criminal responsibility . there has been a great deal of discussion and controversy surrounding various legal standards or tests of criminal responsibility , and research indicates that this discussion and controversy may be all for naught , given that judicial instructions do not appear to have a significant impact on juries verdicts . this being said , however , recent research has begun to address various issues requiring further consideration . such issues include the role that deliberation plays in jury decision making and verdicts and in the impact of juror prototypes on verdicts and the interpretation of case information . future research that incorporates samples of jury eligible adults will help further this important body of knowledge . assessing violence risk . in a variety of contexts , our legal system allows for or requires assessments of risk for violence of certain individuals . that is , the law requires assessments of the risk that those individuals will cause certain types of harm under particular conditions within particular periods of time . such assessments , currently most commonly labeled violence risk assessments , can significantly affect the lives of those individuals and , if a serious proclivity toward violence goes undetected , perhaps others that is , potential victims as well . mental health professionals are often called on , and may even be obliged , to participate in these decisions . litwack and schlesinger updated their review of the literature for the second edition of this handbook and echoed this sentiment . however , in nineteen ninety nine , quinsey , harris , rice , and cormier proposed the complete replacement of clinical assessments of dangerousness with actuarial methods . in response , litwack reviewed the studies directly comparing clinical with actuarial risk assessments and concluded that research to date has not demonstrated that actuarial methods of risk assessment are superior to clinical methods . rather , he proposed , it seems that much more research is needed to determine the relative merits of clinical versus actuarial assessments of dangerousness and that such research should be conducted in as meaningful a manner as possible . here we review some of the most prominent early studies of violence risk assessment both because of their continuing notoriety and because they illustrate important points that should be considered in evaluating most research studies regarding assessments of dangerousness and the assessments themselves . a close examination of this study illustrates , however , how cautious one should be before drawing firm conclusions from many early studies of assessments of dangerousness . on the surface , the clinicians studied here did appear to do much better than chance in their evaluations because the recidivism rate of offender patients released against the advice of the evaluating teams was much higher than the recidivism rate of patients evaluated to be no longer dangerous . however , it appears from the report that the examinees deemed dangerous but nevertheless released were , on average , at risk for recidivism in the community for a significantly longer period than those released after clinical judgments of nondangerousness . thus , it can not be definitively concluded from this study that the clinicians at issue demonstrated at least some ability to assess dangerousness . thus , many seeming false positives may , in fact , be undiscovered true positives . third , the forty nine patients released despite clinical judgments of dangerousness were not a representative sample of patients judged to be dangerous by the clinicians in this study . because these forty nine individuals were released by judicial or parole authorities against professional advice , they were almost certainly patients whose dangerousness was in fact uncertain . why else , in the main , would they have been released ? however , if the far larger number of patients classified as dangerous by the teams and legal authorities and not released had been released , their rate of recidivism and the apparent accuracy of the clinical assessments might have been far higher than it appeared to be for the patients whose dangerousness was questionable . thus , this study simply does not demonstrate that predictions of violence by mental health professionals are likely to be wrong two thirds of the time , regardless of the sample of individuals being evaluated , the circumstances involved , or the confidence of the clinicians in their judgments . a clinical judgment that a patient is dangerous , even a judgment that an individual is sufficiently dangerous to warrant confinement , is rarely , if ever , a prediction that a patient unquestionably will be violent if at liberty or , at least , if unsupervised . rather , almost always , it is a judgment that the subject poses a significant risk of acting violently in certain circumstances . indeed , in forensic settings , patients with a history of serious violence may well be deemed a continued danger by clinicians and judges even if it clearly could not be concluded with confidence that those patients would recidivate if released , as long as it is determined that the patients are still significantly at risk for serious recidivism . that is , a clinical conclusion that a patient can not be recommended for release or even a conclusion that a patient remains dangerous may simply be a determination that the patient remains prone to violence under certain circumstances . violence may or may not actually occur , depending on the totality of the clinical picture . baxstrom and dixon studies . other historically important studies of violence risk assessments by mental health professionals are the well known baxstrom studies and the similar study of the dixon patients by thornberry and jacoby . briefly stated , these studies concerned hundreds of individuals confined for many years in forensic hospitals because they were considered to be too dangerous to be released to civil hospitals , much less to the community . but it is equally clear that the determinations of dangerousness on which the unnecessarily severe confinements were grounded were not based on careful , individualized assessments but on what have been described as administrative decisions , global assessments , and political predictions . nor is there any evidence that the psychiatrists who made those determinations were anything like a representative sample of psychiatrists . indeed , given the fact that many of these patients had grown old , it is hard to believe that a representative sample of mental health professionals would have determined so many of them to be seriously dangerous . these few studies , spurred in large part by legal decisions , are foundational within the violence risk assessment field . they raised alarm bells among the legal and mental health professions in terms of the supposed inability of mental health professionals to predict violence . despite drawing harsh conclusions about clinical ineptitude based on less-than-optimal data or actual clinical risk assessments , these few studies , perhaps ironically , are likely the reason that the contemporary risk assessment field has received as much attention as it has . we now shift our attention to more contemporary themes . contemporary models of violence risk assessment . unstructured clinical judgment is not a model of risk assessment per se . in fact , it was described by meehl as an approach that lacks rules . it is based on professional opinion , experience , and intuition , and clinicians have absolute discretion in terms of the risk factors they rely on and how to integrate them . as grove and meehl wrote , clinical prediction is an informal , in the head , impressionistic , subjective conclusion , reached by a human clinical judge . rather , as holt aptly noted decades ago , disciplined analytical judgment is generally better than global , diffuse judgment ; but it is not any the less clinical . despite these caveats , we address the unstructured clinical judgment model next . strengths and weaknesses of unstructured clinical discretion . using clinical judgment does have benefits , including being able to respond to rare or unusual circumstances and to important elements of the individual case . this fosters case conceptualization and individualized risk management plans . guy metaanalysis , for instance , showed that unstructured approaches were significantly less strongly related to violence than were structured approaches . furthermore , from an ethical perspective , entirely unstructured approaches are problematic , because the final decision may rest on unspecified factors and processes . the defining feature of the actuarial prediction method is the derivation and use of replicable , routinized rules for combining or integrating predictive factors . risk factors are selected because they are predictive of violence and are combined based on their joint predictive qualities in the derivation sample . major contemporary actuarial instruments are listed in table fourteen strengths and weaknesses of actuarial decision making . actuarial prediction methods may possess good reliability , because the methods for using their risk factors are explicit . this can also produce good predictive validity in comparison with unstructured approaches . in addition , the transparency of these methods is a benefit in legal contexts . the predictive properties of most actuarial risk assessment instruments tend to be optimized within a derivation sample . often only one sample is used , and the results may not be cross validated prior to use . first , most actuarial instruments contain risk factors that were demonstrated to be predictive of violence in one sample . although this procedure does indeed demonstrate what variables were predictive in that given sample , there is no guarantee that the same variables will be predictive in other samples or that only those risk factors will be associated with violence in other samples . that is , if , say , substance abuse receives a weight of twice that of psychopathy on some actuarial measure , the implied presumption is that substance abuse is twice as important as psychopathy for all persons to whom the instrument might be applied . this is a very high bar to set , and one that we do not think has been met in the risk assessment field . these include , inter alia , the initial selection of candidate risk factors , how they were measured , how reliable their measurement was , sample size , length of follow up , nature of the sample mix , definition of violence , and method of detecting violence . sample dependence means that estimated probabilities of violence may change if the instrument is used in new samples . therefore , actuarial estimates might not be stable across new samples and , unless demonstrated to be so , ought not be assumed to be so . hart , michie , and cooke calculated confidence intervals for the vrag and ninety nineatic99 at both the group level and the individual level . their argument was that , if precise actuarial estimates are used at the case level , they ought to be shown to possess meaningful precision at that level . their findings indicated that cis at the individual level were so broad as to render individual level prediction meaningless . although some commentators have taken issue with the calculation of cis at the individual level to start with , at the very least their work highlights the great difficulty of applying group based probability estimates to individual persons within those groups . we illustrate some of these problems . it omits sexual deviation , even though this risk factor is related to violence across numerous samples . as another example , the vrag fails to contain various risk factors that have a good deal of empirical support , such as treatment noncompliance and anger . strictly speaking , from an actuarial perspective , this means that evaluators should not consider these risk factors , because they are not contained on the given instrument . they further found that for the vrag , there were probability reversals across its various categories , in which categories with higher estimates that should have had correspondingly higher observed recidivism rates actually produced lower recidivism rates . based on the foregoing , it does not appear that the promise of actuarial instruments has been realized . it is highly likely that persons who score higher compared to lower on these instruments are indeed at higher risk for future violence . research tells us as much . x although actuarial instruments are not inherently static , they tend to include mainly historical factors and do not emphasize repeated measurements to capture change as part of their prescribed use . we focus more on this issue next as we discuss the spj approach . structured professional judgment . the spj approach to violence risk assessment has been in development since the early to mid nineteen nineties . it developed , in part , to compensate for the weaknesses of both the unstructured clinical and the actuarial approaches . however , it also aims to retain some of the strengths of both approaches . having said that , it is not a combination of approaches , and it is not an adjust edactuarial approach . the later section on the clinical assessment of risk expands on the details of how to use it . all spj risk instruments use logical or rational item selection to select risk factors of relevance to the form of violence addressed by the particular spj measure . this approach fosters generalizability of risk assessments across applications as well as comprehensiveness of the set of risk factors on spj instruments . this approach is not sample dependent , and hence risk factors generalize across settings . this approach contrasts with the empirical item selection approach used by most actuarial methods , the weaknesses of which were outlined earlier . unlike an unstructured clinical approach , it also ensures that an a priori , standard set of risk factors is considered by all clinicians for any case . for reasons reviewed earlier when discussing the weaknesses of actuarial approaches , spj instruments do not use numeric score cutoffs to categorize people , nor do they use numeric probability or frequency estimates of future risk for violence . spj approaches require decision makers to classify individuals as low , moderate , or high risk depending on their perceived level of risk and the corresponding required degree or amount of intervention to dampen this risk . clinicians consider the number and relevance of risk factors that are present in a given case . high risk means that an examinee is considered high priority by the evaluator for receiving risk management or reduction interventions , without which the evaluator is confident that the examinee would commit a violent act . then , based on the given case , clinicians decide which risk factors are more versus less relevant in that case . there is no presumption , as there is in actuarial models , that all risk factors are related to violence in the same manner for all persons across all samples . decision makers consider the presence of risk factors that have empirical support at the nomothetic level as well as the risk factors individual relevance at the idiographic level . all spj violence risk instruments include dynamic risk factors . this fosters treatment and risk management planning . as described , the absence of dynamic risk is not an inherent property of actuarial instruments . however , most such instruments tend not to include an emphasis on dynamic risk , which limits their applicability to monitoring risk over time . the spj model helps clinicians decide how often to reevaluate risk factors and how to link risk assessment to risk management . after a review of landmark studies of unstructured clinical judgment , we focus on metaanalytic studies devoted to contemporary actuarial and spj instruments as well as illustrative comparative studies . for detailed commentary on early developmental research on key actuarial instruments such as the vrag and covr , please see the third edition of this handbook . landmark studies on clinical prediction . patients who received a summed rating of at least three out of a possible score of ten were included in the predicted violent group . each of these patients was then matched for sex , race , and age with another emergency room patient who had elicited less staff concern about future violence to others . ultimately , three hundred and fifty seven matched pairs were followed for six months after their discharge from the hospital . violent incidents were detected in thirty six percent of the comparison cases and fifty three percent of the predicted cases , a statistically significant difference . despite the value of these lessons learned , there are other questions about what exactly can be drawn from this study . to begin with , the clinicians in this study were not predicting violence but instead rating their patients potential for violence . it is simply incorrect to conclude that a patient who elicited some clinical concern regarding future dangerousness has been predicted to be violent . that is , the concept of risk is not equivalent to the concept of probability or likelihood . according to the law as well as social science , the concept of risk includes consideration of the nature , severity , imminence , and frequency or duration of harm as well as its likelihood . thus , a clinical opinion of high risk could reflect a belief that the patient poses some significant possibility of serious violence , a high probability of minor violence , or a moderate probability of imminent violence . moreover , this study certainly does not demonstrate that psychiatric emergency room clinicians have sufficient ability to assess future dangerousness to justify emergency commitments based on their assessments of dangerousness . this is because the followup measures and analysis , however much a step forward from past efforts , did not assess a crucial variable : whether the patients violence in the community , when it occurred , was sufficiently serious and occurred sufficiently soon after their return to the community that would have justified continued confinement had it been foreseen . even if clinicians can do better than chance when they assess dangerousness , this is a far cry from concluding that they can assess dangerousness sufficiently well to justify depriving a person of liberty based on such an assessment . as is discussed in more detail later , clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness is required to justify an extended civil commitment . that a clinical determination of dangerousness can be shown to be likely to be somewhat better than a random judgment that is , better than chance does not render that judgment , in and of itself , clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness . to put it another way , statistical significance may not amount to legal significance . actuarial predictions had lower rates of false positive and false negative errors than the clinical predictions for any violence . however , the actuarial instruments were not superior to clinical judgments in predicting serious violence , which is the issue of practical concern . even more important , data regarding three of the most critical variables in the actuarial prediction equation were collected from patients not in the emergency room but in the community after their discharge from the hospital . these variables were the patient score on the hostility subscale of the brief symptom inventory , the patient recent history of drug abuse , and the patient recent history of violence . gardner , lidz , mulvey , and shaw reported that a simple decision tree relying on these three variables and age less than eighteen predicted future violence as well as a regression based method using these and other variables . to the contrary , because the clinicians in gardner studies did as well as the actuarial scheme in predicting future serious violence , and because there is every reason to believe that the necessary actuarial data would not have been nearly as valid if collected in the emergency room if it could have been collected there at all there is every reason to suppose that clinicians are superior to actuarial methods in determining short term serious dangerousness regarding individuals brought for evaluation to psychiatric emergency rooms . in an early metaanalysis of sixty four prospective studies of predictors of violence among mentally disordered offenders , bonta , law , and hanson compared objective risk assessments to clinical judgment . objective assessments produced a relatively strong predictive effect and were considerably more strongly related to general recidivism than clinical judgment . nonetheless , this metaanalysis showed that , at least among mentally disordered offenders , clinical judgment was systematically less strongly related to future violence than actuarial approaches . campbell , french , and gendreau metaanalyzed eighty eight studies from between nineteen eighty and two thousand and six . their primary outcome variable was general recidivism among adults , although subanalyses focused on violent recidivism . instruments that had the largest number of evaluations were evaluated separately to facilitate cross instrument comparison . the authors were able to do this for these instruments : psychopathy checklist revised ; statistical information on recidivism ; the vrag ; and the level of service family of instruments , which includes the original level of supervision inventory and its revisions , the lsir and the level of service case management inventory . in the previously described metaanalysis by blair , the authors reported effect sizes for the vrag , sorag , and static ninety nine that were generally in the moderate range . however , there was a clear decrease in sizes of effects as one progressed from development samples , to instrument author conducted studies employing cross validation samples , through independent cross validation samples . across all three instruments , correlational effect sizes decreased from thirty nine to thirty six to twenty eight . the primary point here is that one can expect the predictive accuracy of actuarial risk assessment instruments to decrease on cross validation . hanson and mortonbourgon evaluated one hundred and eighteen studies examining sex offender risk assessment . they classified assessments as actuarial , spj , and unstructured clinical prediction , and they classified outcomes as any , violent , and sexual . their main conclusion was that actuarial assessments were more accurate than unstructured clinical judgments for each type of outcome . olver , stockdale , and wormith focused on three specific instruments for their metaanalysis of risk assessment of young offenders . one instrument the hare psychopathy checklist revised : youth version is not a risk assessment instrument per se , but they included it for comparative purposes , because psychopathy instruments are commonly used in risk assessment . the authors identified forty four usable studies and compared outcomes across general , violent , nonviolent , and sexual recidivism . none of the measures was specifically developed to assess the risk for sexual recidivism , and none performed well for this outcome . as with other metaanalyses , there were not large differences between measures , each performing comparably and moderately . more specifically , for the structured assessment of violence risk in youth , effect sizes ranged from thirty to thirty eight . for the youth level of service case management inventory , the range was twenty six to thirty two , and for the pcl yv , it was sixteen to twenty eight . in another metaanalysis focusing on young offenders , although specifically on sexual violence , viljoen , mordell , and beneteau again reported no meaningful differences between the four instruments they evaluated . across thirty three studies , effect sizes for sexual recidivism were in the small to moderate range . yang , wong , and coid were specifically interested in comparing individual measures in their metaanalysis of nine measures across twenty eight studies . they were also interested in focusing on contemporary instruments and using the pclr as a benchmark . that is , to what extent do measures improve on the pclr ? further , they investigated the extent to which study features versus specific instruments accounted for differences in predictive effects of instruments across studies . most instruments had moderate predictive validity , and there were few differences between instruments . only about twenty five percent of the variance in effect sizes was attributable to instruments , meaning that much of the difference between effect sizes was attributable to study design features . however , only two studies of the ogrs permitted this comparison , compared to sixteen for the hcr twenty . another , very focused , metaanalysis compared the hcr twenty and pclr in thirty four samples in which both instruments were included . although focused , this metaanalysis contains more hcr twenty comparisons than do other metaanalyses . the authors reported that , in general , the instruments performed the same . when the psychopathy item was removed from the hcr twenty , the instrument auc essentially remained unchanged . most interestingly , the authors secured seven raw data sets and were able to conduct head to head multivariate analyses of the hcr twenty and the pclr . the hcr twenty added unique , incremental validity beyond the pclr , whereas the converse was not true . specifically , using metaanalytic logistic regression , the authors reported that , with both instruments included in the analysis , for every one point increase on the hcr twenty , the probability of detecting violence increased twenty three percent , whereas for every onepoint increase on the pclr , the probability of detecting violence decreased by one percent . in yet another metaanalysis , the authors were interested in determining whether certain instruments were more accurate than others and whether features of study design impacted accuracy . also unlike most previous metaanalyses , they coded instruments into predictive bins of low versus high risk . for spj instruments , the analysis was based on the nonnumeric summary risk ratings of low , moderate , and high risk . for actuarial instruments , the authors similarly reduced the numeric score categories into two bins . unlike most previous metaanalyses , they argued that there were indeed differences between measures in terms of predictive accuracy . they reported that the savry produced the largest effect and the ls and pcl measures produced the smallest . the authors interpreted this finding to mean that instruments designed to assess risk in specific populations were more accurate than those designed for more general use or those not designed specifically for risk assessment . it should be pointed out , however , that differences between the savry and the ls family of instruments are only somewhat meaningful , in that the savry was designed specifically for youth violence whereas the ls family spans youth and adulthood , and most studies were based on the adult ls measures . that is , generally , these differences in effect sizes do not compare instruments that would be used with the same populations . in terms of comparing spj and actuarial instruments , spj instruments produced diagnostic odds ratios that were larger than those for actuarial instruments , although these differences were not significant . most potential moderators were not significant , including gender , country , setting , and ethnicity , although there was a small trend for assessments to be more accurate among samples with a greater percentage of older , caucasian participants . the metaanalysis conducted by hanson and mortonbourgon also is an exception , although there were only three sex offender studies available for analysis that used summary risk ratings . although it is important to know how well spj instruments fare in terms of the sum of their risk factors , as a general indication of whether , in general , more risk factors equates to higher risk , this numeric index is not the one primarily intended to guide clinical practice . as discussed , raters are expected to come to decisions of low , moderate , or high risk based on their consideration of the number and relevance of risk factors and the expected degree of intervention required to reduce risk . in addition to singh , we are aware of only one broad metaanalysis that includes summary risk ratings . although it is unpublished at this time , we review it here , because it exhaustively metaanalyzed all spj literature . guy metaanalysis evaluated one hundred and thirteen spj disseminations and , where possible , compared these to actuarial and unstructured clinical prediction . focusing on spj studies , effect sizes did not differ as a function of gender , europe versus north america , adult versus adolescent , setting , institution versus community , file versus file and interview , or whether authors or translators were involved in the research . guy also compared the numeric use of spj instruments with the use of summary risk ratings . this was particularly the case for physical violence . across all available instruments and effect sizes , spj summary risk ratings produced larger effect sizes than actuarial instruments . for unstructured predictions , the effect sizes were on average smaller . based on one composite effect size per study , spj summary risk ratings and actuarial instruments were both stronger than unstructured predictions . in direct comparisons , summary risk ratings and actuarial predictions produced very similar effect sizes that did not differ significantly . three general observations about risk assessment metaanalytic research can be made . for instance , there have been approximately one hundred studies on the predictive validity of the hcr twenty , yet in most metaanalyses only a small sampling of these studies is included . from a substantive perspective , four conclusions can be drawn . there is very little if any evidence that actuarial methods are more accurate than spj instruments , as is argued by some . indeed , one can fairly state based on metaanalytic evidence that professional , nonactuarial judgments , derived in an spj context , are as strongly or more strongly associated with violence than actuarial methods . instruments designed specifically to evaluate risk for violence seem to perform better than those designed or used to predict general criminal behavior . there is fairly clear evidence for validity shrinkage when using actuarial instruments . in this section , we review the studies that have evaluated the summary risk ratings of low , moderate , and high risk used in the spj approach , especially those that have compared them to the numeric use of such instruments or to actuarial instruments . we do so because this topic has only recently started to work its way into metaanalyses , and there remains less research on this use of the spj model relative to simply summing its risk factors . by our count , a total of thirty four published studies have investigated whether summary risk judgments are predictive of violence . of these thirty four studies , thirty support the use of final spj judgments in violence risk assessment , in that they were significantly predictive of violence . four studies did not find evidence of predictive validity of final spj judgments in predicting violence . in one of these studies that used one spj and three actuarial instruments , none of the instruments predicted violence . similarly , in schaap , none of the hcr twenty or pclr indices were predictive of either general or violent recidivism in this sample of forty five female forensic psychiatric patients . the hcr twenty summary risk ratings produced an auc of sixty five5 , suggesting that low power might have contributed to null findings . in braithewaite , the sample size was only thirty four . in a sample of one hundred and sixty nine male adolescent sex offenders in residential treatment , viljoen found that total savry scores were predictive of nonsexual violence in youth whereas final structured professional ratings were not . of note , the thirty four studies spanned multiple countries canada , denmark , finland , the netherlands , norway , portugal , serbia , spain , sweden , the united kingdom and the united states and included numerous different measures : early assessment risk list for boys ; estimate of risk of adolescent sexual offense recividism ; hcr twenty ; structured assessment of protective factors for violence risk ; sara ; savry ; short term assessment of risk and treatability ; start : adolescent version ; sexual violence risk twenty . as such , the finding that summary risk ratings are predictive of violence is robust and is so across country and instrument . to test incremental validity , investigators typically use a multivariate regression approach in which the comparison index is entered in the first step of the model and the summary risk ratings are entered as the second step . a dutch measure modeled after and highly similar to the hcr twenty also showed incremental validity among forensic patients . the start summary risk rating showed incremental validity beyond its own numeric total among forensic psychiatric inpatients , although its adolescent version , the start : av , did not . incremental validity has been shown with the savry in three samples but not in two others . incremental validity of summary risk ratings has also been found with the earl twenty in six to twelve year old boys and the sara in a sample of adult domestic violence offenders . when compared to actuarial tools such as the vrag , the sorag and the static ninety nine , summary risk ratings of spj instruments tend to have better predictive utility for the outcome of interest . more important , researchers have investigated whether summary risk judgments add predictive validity above and beyond other instruments typically used for violence risk assessment . most such studies have found that summary risk ratings add incrementally to actuarial risk assessment tools . some studies using multivariate analyses have demonstrated that the hcr twenty summary risk judgment added incrementally to the pclr when used to predict violence in samples of criminal offenders and forensic patients . lodewijks , doreleijers showed that savry summary risk ratings possess incremental validity beyond unstructured clinical predictions , a finding consistent with guy metaanalytic finding that unstructured predictions were substantially less accurate than spj or actuarial methods . considering all of the empirical evidence , it appears safe to conclude that spj instruments , used in practice as intended , are as accurate as or more accurate than actuarial indices derived from their numeric use , than actuarial instruments , than unstructured clinical prediction , and than pcl instruments . clinical evaluations of violence risk have been described and discussed for decades . there is good consensus that these evaluations comprise two distinct phases . the first step is to understand an examinee potential for violence . it involves systematic analysis of the examinee violence history , psychosocial adjustment more generally , and living situation . the goal is to understand what kinds of violence examinees might perpetrate , against which people , for which reasons , and under which circumstances . it involves systematic analysis of possible future living situations , both with and without the influence of external agents , to identify putative controlling factors . the goal is to prevent future violence by developing a plan for intervention . this is sometimes characterized as a process of management . commentators who hold this view believe that , in certain legal contexts , violence risk assessment requires only prediction that is , the only legally relevant issue is a subject potential for future violence whereas in other legal contexts , as well as all clinical contexts , it requires both prediction and management . others have argued that the relation between prediction and management is bidirectional or recursive . first professionals start the prediction phase ; but the prediction phase segues into the management phase , which may stimulate reiteration of the prediction and , in turn , management phases . according to this view , the prediction and management phases are flip sides of the same coin . each requires the other : good prediction is impossible without systematic consideration of the subject possible future living situations and interventions ; and , conversely , good management is impossible without systematic consideration of the potential for future violence . commentators with this perspective believe that the prediction phase is conditional or contingent on the management phase and that prediction is thus not legally relevant without consideration of management . in the remainder of this section we present a framework for comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk based on the spj approach . framework based on the spj approach . as discussed previously , the hallmark of the spj approach is that professionals use evidence based guidelines to structure evaluations of violence risk , but their decisions rely on the exercise of discretion rather than strict adherence to a fixed and explicit algorithm developed a priori . in some respects , it is misleading to speak of an spj approach , as this gives the impression that there is a single , monolithic set of rules to which all those who develop or use spj guidelines adhere . the reality is that various guidelines have been developed by multiple groups working around the world over the past twenty years or so , each geared for different populations of subjects , different groups of users , and different forms of violence . yet these spj guidelines are consistent at the most broad or general level in positing that the task of comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk can be broken down into about six major steps : gather critical information . identify the presence of risk factors . with respect to the quantity of information , evaluators should try to gather all the information that is necessary to reach opinions regarding risk in the case , given the context of the evaluation . gathering information requires patience , thoroughness and persistence . rather than diagnostic or interviewing brilliance and the painstaking assembling of facts and the checking of information from a variety of sources . as we noted , however , the context of the evaluation sets limits on the quantity and quality of information available to clinicians . for instance , emergency room clinicians do not have the information or the time available to gather information that clinicians typically have in long term forensic facilities . information should be gathered about multiple issues or topics and from multiple sources . for example , information about an examinee sexual functioning is likely to be directly relevant to considering his or her risk for sexual violence but is likely to be less relevant to an evaluation of risk for terroristic violence . one important topic about which information should be gathered in every case is the examinee history of violence . for each major incident , the evaluator should attempt to determine who was involved , what happened and why , where and when it happened , and the examinee reactions . typically , sources of information will include : interviews with and direct observation of the examinee . interviews with victims of or witnesses to past violence or review of their documented accounts . interviews with collateral informants , such as family members , friends , and coworkers . review of collateral records including but not limited to criminal histories from various agencies , police reports , statements by the examinee , and statements by victims and witnesses concerning past violence ; prosecution and court files ; daily logs from institutional and community corrections ; presentence or predisposition reports ; mental health and medical treatment records ; assessment and treatment reports by civil and forensic mental health consultants ; daily logs from outpatient and inpatient treatment facilities ; and school , employment , and military records . however , in many cases it is impossible to gather and consider all the information available in a given case . step two : identify the presence of risk factors . evaluators can not keep in their heads all the information they gathered in its raw or original form ; they simplify it by sorting it into useful units : risk factors . the primary problem here is that evaluators may not use consistent or sensible frameworks to sort information . they may give insufficient weight to risk factors with established validity or too much weight to risk factors of little or questionable validity . worse still , they may use a framework that is implicit , so they are not entirely conscious or selfaware of what they did or did not consider risk factors . spj guidelines structure this part of the evaluation process by giving evaluators a checklist or aide memoire of risk factors whose validity is supported by systematic review of the scientific and professional literature . the goal is to focus the attention of evaluators in the first instance on those issues or topics that are considered important in general for evaluations of that sort things that should be considered at a minimum . most spj guidelines include a minimum of about ten and a maximum of about thirty risk factors , although the number , conceptualization , and definition of risk factors vary across guidelines , according to the nature of the risks being evaluated and the nature of the evaluators who will be using the guidelines or the settings in which they will be used . step three : evaluate the relevance of risk factors . risk factors may be relevant in general or on average according to the scientific and professional literature but apparently irrelevant in the case at hand on the basis of idiographic evaluation . the next step , then , is to analyze the risk factors identified as present to make sure they are relevant that is , germane to the examinee risk for violence and the management of that risk . as noted previously , a recent development in the spj approach , reflected most clearly in the hcr twenty , is to encourage evaluators to consider the relevance of each risk factor both individually and collectively . the crux of the issue is aptly delineated by kluckhohn and murray : very man is in certain respects like all other men , like some other men , like no other man . in essence , violence risk assessments must investigate all three of these issues . decision theory may be considered a version of a well established theory of criminal behavior known as the psychology of criminal conduct or the general personality and cognitive social learning perspective but tailored specifically to violence . decision theory views violence as a choice . the decision may be made quickly , based on poor information , and with little care and attention that is , it may be a bad decision or a decision made badly but it is a decision nonetheless . within the framework of decision theory , it is assumed that before people engage in violence , they have gone through a four step thought process : the possibility of acting violently in a given situation entered their conscious awareness , and they entertained this notion rather than dismissing it or pushing it out of their minds . they evaluated the possible positive consequences of violence and determined that it might result in reward or benefit for them . according to the decision theory framework , comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk require evaluators to understand how and why examinees decided to engage in violence as well as why they decided not to engage in violence in the past , including the various factors that impinged on or influenced their decision making , and also to understand what interventions , events , and occurrences might encourage examinees decisions to act prosocially and discourage their decisions to act nonviolently . risk factors , then , are things that influence decision making . they can motivate , disinhibit , or destabilize decisions . motivators increase the perceived rewards or benefits of violence . disinhibitors decrease the perceived costs or negative consequences of violence . destabilizers generally disturb or disorganize people ability to monitor and control their decision making . step four : develop scenarios of violence . instead , evaluators need to consider what kinds of violence the examinee might perpetrate , for which motivations , against which victims , with what kinds of consequences , and at which times . in short , they need to consider scenarios of violence . each scenario is a story about violence the examinee might commit . it is not a prediction about what will happen ; rather , it is a general forecast or speculation about what reasonably could happen , in light of the evaluator general knowledge and experience and the specifics of the case at hand . it is most appropriate for situations of complexity and unbounded uncertainty in our view , an accurate characterization of the state of affairs in which many violence risk assessments are conducted . the spj approach encourages evaluators to consider four broad scenarios of violence . the evaluator considers a scenario in which the examinee commits violence similar to his or her most recent act what might be called a repeat , flat trajectory , linear projection , or point projection scenario . the evaluator considers a worst case scenario , also known as a pessimistic or doom scenario , one in which the trajectory increases , and the examinee commits a more serious , and perhaps even life threatening , act of violence . the evaluator considers a twist or sideways trajectory scenario in which the nature of violence changes or evolves , such as with respect to the manner of victim selection or the type of coercion used . next , consistent with general principles of scenario planning , evaluators develop case management plans based on plausible scenarios of violence , which in turn were based on the presence and relevance of risk factors . it is common in the spj approach to structure development of plans by considering four general categories of strategies : monitoring , supervision , treatment , and victim safety planning . within each general category of strategies , evaluators identify specific strategies , then translate these into more detailed plans by considering tactics and even logistics . critically , as discussed earlier , the spj approach does not make these judgments using a fixed and explicit algorithm based on some combination of risk factors ; instead , evaluators use their discretion to consider , decide , and explain the relevance or meaningfulness of any factors that are present with respect to the risks posed and management of those risks . also , evaluators are encouraged to limit or qualify their opinions based on the quantity and quality of case information they reviewed . additional considerations . four additional themes consistently emerge from both the literature and court decisions regarding what a reasonably competent assessment of risk entails , once clinicians are aware that there exist reasonable grounds to believe patients may pose a risk for violence . when tarasoff liability has been imposed on clinicians , it has usually been because of the failure of the clinician to abide by one or more of these themes . clinicians must be alert to their own possible tendencies to avoid , deny , or wishfully minimize violent themes and affects . that is , if the possibility of violence risk arises in a clinical context , it must be investigated in a reasonably full and complete manner . in our view , this entails the use of comprehensive violence risk assessment procedures , such as those provided under the spj approach . the use of such an approach minimizes the chances that important risk factors will be overlooked . borum , swartz , and swanson suggested : are you the sort of person who has trouble controlling your temper ? and have you found yourself hitting people or damaging things when you are angry ? . monahan observed : directly asking patients about violent behavior and possible indices of violent behavior is surely the easiest and quickest way to obtain this essential information . openended questions such as what is the most violent thing you have ever done ? or what is the closest you have ever come to being violent ? may be useful probes , as might do you ever worry that you might physically hurt somebody ? the obvious problem , of course , is that patients may lie or distort their history or their current thoughts . as the violent history of the examinee becomes more distant in time , more effort may be required to accurately reconstruct the details , but such efforts should be made . at the same time , all potential sources of information regarding the examinee former violence , current behavior , and mental status should be considered . in institutional contexts , it is generally sensible to have patients assessed by clinicians who are not attached to the patient treatment and care before final decisions or recommendations are made . this recommendation offered to facilitate objectivity in assessment is consistent with ethical guidelines for mental health professionals . therefore , except in obvious cases , a more detached evaluator may be called for . the clinician needs to be able to gingerly increase the frustration or challenge in the interview to test the frustration tolerance and impulse control of the patient without precipitating a dangerous outburst . a highly structured , unchallenging interview can dull the examiner into underestimating the violent potential of the patient . in certain circumstances , with certain patients , we would make the point even more strongly : sometimes it is precisely the question or challenge that will precipitate a dangerous outburst that must be posed . thus , there may be no reason to subject a patient to a stressful interview if it is clear from other information that less secure supervision is not in order in any event . but when a patient with a history of serious violence is being considered for transfer to a less secure setting , it is hard to imagine concluding that transfer is in order without at least determining how the patient reacts to stressful questions regarding the circumstances he or she is likely to face in a new setting . even when stressful questions are indicated , clinicians should be careful not to be excessively , or needlessly , aggressive in their manner or confrontations . indeed , it can not be overly stressed that comprehensive risk assessments can be accomplished only if the assessor is first well versed about the examinee history . it has often been said of legal trial practice that preparation is the key to cross examination . equally so , preparation is the key to a fully comprehensive risk assessment . a number of commentators have suggested that assessments of violence risk can be improved if assessors avoid making errors that have frequently been observed to pertain to dangerousness evaluations . indeed , as appelbaum and gutheil stressed , it may be useful in many forensic evaluations for clinicians to imagine that they were retained as an expert by the other side of the case , and to imagine how their evaluation or conclusions might be different if that were so . be careful not to underestimate the potential for violence in female patients who have a history of violence . it is true that , on the whole in our society , women have a much lower rate of violence than men , yet research indicates that women who evidence risk factors for violence are about as likely as men to commit violence and that , relative to their estimations regarding men , clinicians tend to underestimate the risk of future violence with women . with these guidelines and recommendations in mind , we now turn to a discussion of how violence risk assessment has fared in the courts . violence risk assessments and the law . although not unmindful of the questions that existed regarding the validity of predictions of violence by mental health professionals , in barefoot , the majority opined that such questions could adequately be dealt with by the trier of fact , we are not persuaded , stated the court , that such testimony is almost entirely unreliable and that the factfinder and the adversary system will not be competent to uncover , recognize and take due account of its shortcomings . in schall martin , the supreme court observed that from a legal point of view there is nothing inherently unattainable about a prediction of future criminal conduct and that the lower court had specifically rejected the contention , based on . sociological data , that it is impossible to predict future violent behavior . the supreme court determined that postconviction civil commitment in this manner did not violate substantive due process rights under the constitution . in kansas crane , the court further interpreted this statute and held that the lack of control over the sexually violent behavior did not have to be absolute . in its reasoning , the court continued to demonstrate amenability toward risk assessment and a reliance on mental health professionals in stating that the lack of behavioral control , when viewed in light of such features of the case as the nature of the psychiatric diagnosis and the severity of the mental abnormality itself , must be sufficient to distinguish the dangerous sexual offender whose serious mental illness , abnormality , or disorder subjects him to civil commitment from the dangerous but typical recidivist convicted in an ordinary criminal case . clinical assessments of dangerousness have long been admissible under the frye test , which still prevails in many states and which allows for expert testimony regarding the results of professional procedures when those procedures have gained general acceptance in their field . many courts have indicated that testimony based in part on actuarial instruments is admissible because it is combined with clinical opinion . we note this was not the situation or issue presented in the instant case . the instruments were used in conjunction with a full clinical evaluation and their limitations were clearly made known to the jury . regardless of the basis for the testimony , courts have rarely given substantive consideration to the reliability of risk assessment in their admission decisions , even after the daubert and kumho tire opinions . in their assessment of reliability , courts have taken several approaches . courts are more likely to subject actuarial tools to frye or daubert analyses , but the application of these standards to actuarial instruments varies across jurisdictions . as noted , some courts have argued that frye and daubert do not apply to the scientifically based actuarial instruments when they are combined with clinical interviewing , but that they would be if presented alone . some courts have pronounced the instruments generally accepted and their results admissible even without a frye hearing . regarding the actuarial instruments , one court concluded that they were at least as good , if not in most cases better , in terms of reliability and predictability than clinical interviews . some courts that previously determined that testimony based on actuarial instruments was inadmissible because the tools were not generally accepted were later overruled by courts finding that they are generally accepted . in short , whether in frye or in daubert jurisdictions , courts have been receptive to violence risk assessments , whether clinical or actuarial , by mental health professionals . civil commitment decisions . the court in addington also observed , whether the individual is mentally ill and dangerous to either himself or others and is in need of confined therapy turns on the meaning of the facts which must be interpreted by expert psychiatrists and psychologists . there are two points to note about the addington decision . first , it applied only to extended confinements . therefore , presumably , less than clear and convincing evidence of mental illness and dangerousness could justify a relatively brief commitment for the purpose of further evaluation . second , it is important to recognize that the requirement of clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness , when it exists , is not a requirement of proof that the individual is more likely than not to be violent if not hospitalized . rather , it is a requirement for clear and convincing evidence of enough risk of enough harm to justify the confinement at issue . this trend can best be appreciated by comparing more recent decisions with the rulings in lessard schmidt , an oftencited federal court decision of a generation ago that strictly limited the government power to civilly commit mentally ill individuals . in lessard , the court ruled that a commitment could be justified only by proof of an extreme likelihood that if the person is not confined he will do immediate harm to himself or others . moreover , the lessard court held that the necessary determination of dangerousness had to be based upon a finding of a recent overt act , attempt , or threat to do substantial harm to oneself or another . in addition to rejecting the notion that violence must be likely or based on a recent overt act or threat in order to justify a commitment , other court decisions have rejected the notion that future dangerousness must be imminent to justify confinement . thus , as one of us has written elsewhere : it appears that as the earlier abuses of the civil commitment system are supplanted in judicial and public concern by concern about potential violence by mentally ill persons who perhaps could not be committed under a strict reading of earlier and more libertarian oriented decisions , the judicial pendulum is swinging toward a greater willingness to allow civil commitments to protect the public from potential danger , and to allow that danger to be assessed broadly , rather than by rigid , impractical rules . a court may consider the nature of the conduct that resulted in the initial commitment , the likelihood of relapse or cure , history of substance or alcohol abuse , the effects of medication , the likelihood that the patient will discontinue medication without supervision , the length of confinement and treatment , the lapse of time since the underlying criminal acts and any other relevant factors that form a part of an insanity acquittee psychological profile . of course , it is ultimately for the courts , rather than clinicians , to decide when mentally disordered individuals pose a sufficient risk of causing significant harm to justify depriving them of their liberty . but emergency room clinicians must make such decisions regarding emergency admissions , and judges frequently look to clinicians for their input and insights before making their decisions . therefore , before clinicians deem a patient to be dangerous for commitment purposes , they should be mindful of the fact that they are , indeed , making a risk assessment and that , just as a sufficient risk of future violence may justify a patient confinement , so , too , a patient right to liberty should be weighed in the balance . indeed , since the publication of the previous version of this chapter , several hundred empirical studies have been published on violence risk assessment instruments . we have indeed made progress in terms of understanding how to develop and validate risk assessment instruments and how instruments from different families fare relative to one another . perhaps one of the biggest developments is that , contrary to previous opinion , clinical judgments of risk so long as they are derived in a structured context , such as that provided by the spj model are as or more accurate compared to actuarial predictions of violence . this is a major and liberating finding that can facilitate focus on other important topics within risk assessment . the risk assessment field could benefit from turning its attention to several other areas of focus in the future . first , although commentators have been stressing the importance of dynamic risk for some time , the empirical evaluation of changes in risk factors over time lags . this is understandable it is hard research to conduct . regardless of the answer to these important conceptual questions , it is clear that important strides are under way to understand the role that focusing on positive aspects of our clients lives might have . for example , several assessment instruments focus on positive aspects of clients . the start requires ratings of patient strengths along with vulnerabilities . the savry contains a subscale devoted to protective factors . the saprof is devoted entirely to protective factors and is intended to be used in conjunction with an spj risk assessment instrument such as the hcr twenty . empirical support for the utility of each of these measures is accruing , and we encourage the continued attention to this topic . some concerns were evident in the findings reported by singh . further , it is important to understand whether , even if a risk assessment instrument predicts violence comparably well across , say , men and women , its risk factors have comparable meaning or relevance across gender . to some extent , this question can be integrated into the formulation stage of clinical assessment , where clinicians are grappling with making sense of the meaning of certain risk factors for individuals . continued work on this topic is necessary . finally , we think it is important that researchers expand their topics beyond those concerning the predictive accuracy of instruments . assessing and improving predictive accuracy is crucial , to be sure . however , if we study accuracy issues within real world settings , where risk assessments may influence interventions , those interventions interfere with the outcomes that we are interested in .