conducting personal injury evaluations . unlike criminal proceedings in which the government charges an individual with having committed an unlawful act , civil proceedings involve disputes between private parties . many such cases involve allegations that one party has been injured by another party and seeks compensation for the damage that was done . such actions are known as tort or personal injury cases , which are the subject of this chapter . although many personal injury cases involve claims of physical injuries or financial losses , allegations of psychological injury or emotional distress can also be elements of a tort action . koch , douglas , nicholls and neill defined psychological injuries as stress related emotional conditions resulting from real or imagined threats or injuries caused by a third party . in cases involving claims of emotional distress , psychologists may be retained as experts , most often to evaluate the plaintiff and offer an opinion on the nature and extent of the psychological damage incurred by the plaintiff and the causal relationship between these injuries and the actions of the defendant . this chapter discusses the legal , ethical , and practical aspects of performing forensic psychological evaluations in personal injury cases . legal context of personal injury evaluations . it is important that psychologists undertaking evaluations in personal injury cases have knowledge of the legal parameters of civil litigation . this includes an understanding of tort law , the civil procedure , and the rules governing expert testimony . tort law . tort law forms the legal framework for personal injury cases . a tort is a civil wrong , but it is not necessarily an illegal act . sexual assault , for example , is both a crime and a possible basis for a tort action . in contrast , a person who slips on ice outside a neighbor front door and breaks a leg may be able to sue the neighbor for the harm suffered . it is unlikely , however , that the neighbor would be charged for having ice on the doorstep . melton point out that , in addition , torts are not directly related to moral conduct insofar as an act may be immoral but not tortious , and provide the example of a bystander failing to save a drowning child . although this may be morally reprehensible , the person could not be sued for failure to act . in a concise restatement of torts , the american law institute defines tortious conduct as including both acts of commission and acts of omission . for an act to be tortious , it must meet four criteria : duty , dereliction , damage , and causality . duty refers to an obligation by the defendant to the plaintiff . consider a psychologist obligation to keep confidential a patient disclosures . if the psychologist tells someone else what the patient confided , the psychologist would not be living up to this duty . if a psychologist is having coffee with a friend , however , and the friend discloses she is having an affair , the psychologist has no legal duty to keep that information confidential . the second required element is a dereliction or breach . dereliction occurs when the tortfeasor fails to fulfill a duty . for example , the owner of a day care center fails to properly screen potential employees and hires an individual who has a history of sexually abusing children , or a doctor fails to review a patient chart and prescribes a medication to which the patient is allergic . in both of these examples , the duty owed was not fulfilled . damage , which can include monetary losses , physical injuries , or emotional distress , is the third element of a tort . a tort action requires that , in addition to the dereliction of duty , some damage must have occurred . suppose , for example , that when the patient just described attempted to get the prescription filled at the pharmacy , the pharmacist recognized that the patient had an allergy to the medication and called the physician , who then prescribed an alternative medication . despite the physician dereliction of duty , the patient suffered no damage . the patient , therefore , would have no cause for a tort action . the final element of a tort is causality , which requires that the damage incurred be directly related to the tortfeasor dereliction of duty . this concept is also known as proximate cause . the actions of the tortfeasor must be a primary reason or a substantial factor in bringing about the harm . in the previous example , suppose that , due to the physician error and the need to obtain an alternative medication , the patient was delayed for an extra thirty minutes at the pharmacy . upon leaving the pharmacy , the patient was struck by a car operated by a drunk driver and suffered severe physical injuries . despite the physician dereliction of duty in prescribing the wrong medication , it is more likely that the actions of the drunk driver and not those of the physician would be considered the proximate cause of the patient injuries . a tort action seeks to make the plaintiff whole that is , to return the plaintiff to the state he or she was in prior to the defendant wrongful actions . if the defendant is judged to be responsible for the injury suffered by the plaintiff , the plaintiff will be awarded damages in the form of monetary compensation . the amount of the award is determined by the degree of damage suffered by the plaintiff and the behavior of the defendant that resulted in the plaintiff injury . tortious acts can be intentional or negligent . intent means that the actor desired to cause the consequence of the act . sexual assault is an example of an intentional tort . a woman who sees someone lurking in her yard and points a gun at that person , in order to frighten him so that he will leave her yard , is acting with intent when the person runs away , because inducing fear was the intention of her act . if , however , the person runs into the street in front of a moving car and is killed , his death was not the intent of the actor , despite the ultimate outcome . negligence is defined as a departure from a standard of conduct demanded by the community for the protection of others against unreasonable risk . both acts of commission and acts of omission can be negligent . it might be argued that pointing a gun at someone would constitute an unreasonable risk . failing to act can also be negligent . for example , a preschool teacher who failed to notice that a pupil had wandered out of the school might be considered negligent . process of civil litigation . both federal and state courts have rules governing the process of civil litigation . in the federal court system , these rules are known as the federal rules of civil procedure . all states and the district of columbia have similar sets of rules governing civil procedure in their jurisdictions . greenberg noted that , despite variations , most jurisdictions follow a similar pattern , which consists of several stages , including pleadings , discovery , trial , and judgment . at any stage of this process prior to a judgment being rendered , all or part of the case may be dismissed or the parties may agree to a settlement , thus ending the proceedings . the civil action begins when the plaintiff files a legal pleading known as the complaint , which outlines the grounds for the action and the events giving rise to the dispute . the complaint identifies the defendant and describes why the plaintiff believes he or she is entitled to damages . the defendant is then notified of the pending litigation and provides a response , or answer . in addition , the defendant may take other actions , including filing a motion to dismiss , filing a counterclaim whereby the defendant makes a claim against the plaintiff , or filing a notice of an affirmative defense that seeks to negate the plaintiff right to recover . the second phase of personal injury litigation is known as discovery . this phase allows the parties to obtain evidence and can be accomplished in a number of ways , including requests for the production of documents , the use of interrogatories , depositions , and physical or mental examinations of the plaintiff . this is the point at which forensic psychologists typically enter the process . if the plaintiff alleges that he or she incurred psychological damage or suffers from emotional distress as a result of the defendant actions , the defendant has the right to independently assess the nature and degree of psychological damage the plaintiff alleges . this is authorized by frcp rule thirty five . the plaintiff attorney may also choose to have the plaintiff evaluated as a way of providing further evidence supporting the plaintiff claimed injuries or to dispute the findings of the defendant evaluation . the psychologist also provides a written report describing the findings from the examination and the opinions he or she reached . following this disclosure , the psychologist is likely to be deposed by the opposing attorney and will be required to provide the opposing attorney with documents , including test data , notes , and correspondence related to the evaluation . the next phase of litigation is the trial . in civil litigation , the plaintiff has the burden of proof . this means the plaintiff is required to prove that it is more likely than not that the defendant actions resulted in damage to the plaintiff . this standard of proof is known as preponderance of the evidence . the plaintiff case is presented first . the attorney for the plaintiff will call and directly examine witnesses . in direct examination , the attorney asks nonleading , open ended questions , such as doctor , can you describe your examination of the plaintiff ? rather than doctor , is not it true that the plaintiff has posttraumatic stress disorder ? the purpose of direct examination is to provide the witness the opportunity to give evidence that will support the plaintiff case . following direct examination of each witness , the defendant attorney will cross examine the witness . cross examination is intended to raise questions about the reliability of the witness evidence and to expose weaknesses or contradictions in the witness testimony , evidence or to expose weaknesses or contradictions in the witness testimony . during cross examination , leading questions may be asked , such as doctor , is not it true that no scale on the minnesota multiphasic personality inventory can prove that someone is responding truthfully on the test ? after the plaintiff case is concluded , the defense presents its case . witnesses will be called and directly examined , followed by cross examination by the plaintiff attorney . after both the plaintiff and the defendant arguments have been presented , the judgment phase begins . the trier of fact will consider the credibility of the evidence and render a verdict . in civil litigation , there are three considerations : did the defendant breach a duty that was owed to the plaintiff ? was the plaintiff injured by the actions of the defendant ? if so , what damages should be awarded to the plaintiff ? either party may choose to appeal the verdict . expert witness in civil litigation . in the federal court system , the meaning of the term expert witness is defined in rule seven hundred and two of the federal rules of evidence as a witness who is qualified as an expert by knowledge , skill , experience , training , or education and can assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue using scientific , technical or other specialized knowledge . expert witnesses , unlike lay witnesses , may testify in the form of opinions and inferences if the testimony is based on sufficient facts and data ; the product of reliable methods and principles ; and if the underlying methods and principles have been applied reliably to the facts of the case . in personal injury cases , a psychologist may be retained as an expert by either the plaintiff or the defendant . the plaintiff can elect to be examined by an expert in order to provide evidence of emotional damage or in an attempt to dispute the findings of the defendant expert . if the findings of the examination do not appear to be helpful to the plaintiff case , it is likely that the plaintiff will not request a written report from the expert or disclose the expert as a potential witness . if the examiner opinion appears to support the plaintiff position , however , he or she will be asked to write a report and will be disclosed as an expert . as noted previously , rule thirty five of the frcp provides that the defendant can force the plaintiff to undergo an examination when the plaintiff claims psychological injury as a basis for receiving damages . in such cases , the plaintiff is entitled to receive a written report describing the examiner findings . this report must be detailed and disclose all the procedures used , the opinions reached , and the foundations for each opinion . in return , the plaintiff is required to provide the defendant any reports under the plaintiff control addressing these same issues . ethical issues in personal injury work . when psychologists are engaged in forensic work , they have increased exposure to legal risks . the parties involved in the legal system have no obligation to safeguard the professional or legal interests of the experts participating in the process . consequently , psychologists may face ethical challenges engendered by the adversarial nature and the differing professional responsibilities , agendas , and goals of those working in the legal system . the ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct contains both aspirational goals and enforceable rules of conduct for psychologists . because the ethical standards are written broadly so as to be applicable to psychologists working in a range of professional roles and circumstances , psychologists doing forensic work may benefit from the additional guidance provided by the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology . unlike the ethical standards of the eppcc , which mandate behavior , the sgfp are aspirational and were designed to improve the quality of forensic psychological services ; enhance the practice and facilitate the systematic development of forensic psychology ; encourage a high level of quality in professional practice ; and encourage forensic practitioners to acknowledge and respect the rights of those they serve . specific issues that are likely to arise for psychologists performing personal injury evaluations are discussed next . a more detailed discussion of ethical considerations in forensic practice can be found in weiner and hess . in the midst of the adversarial legal system , ethics demand that psychologists remain objective , impartial , and fair . psychologists have a duty to the court to offer testimony that is reliable , helpful , honest and objective . this commitment to objectivity must be maintained regardless of which party retained the psychologist , how sympathetic or unsympathetic the plaintiff may be , or the nature of the relationship the psychologist has with the attorneys in the case . one way to facilitate objectivity is for the psychologist to establish consistent evaluation procedures that are utilized regardless of the specific circumstances or retaining party . by following a preestablished protocol , the psychologist is more likely to avoid bias in test selection , the scope or length of the interview , and decisions about including collateral sources . objectivity is also enhanced by a methodical approach to data interpretation characterized by identifying and testing alternative hypotheses , acknowledging and considering inconsistencies in the data , and avoiding selectively attending to data that support the evaluator opinion while ignoring or minimizing conflicting data . roles and role conflict . conducting an evaluation in a personal injury case requires that the psychologist understand his or her role in this process . whether the psychologist is retained by the plaintiff or the defendant , his or her role is to provide an accurate and objective assessment of the plaintiff . this role is distinctly different from the role of a treating psychologist and the role that the attorneys play . as described by greenberg and shuman , the role of the therapist is to demonstrate support , acceptance , and empathy toward the patient and seek to understand the patient perceptions and feelings . the therapist knowledge of the patient world usually is based exclusively on the patient selfreport and is likely to be skewed by the patient biases , assumptions , and attitudes . the therapist is less concerned about the objective truth of the patient circumstances than the patient subjective understanding of these circumstances . because of these differences , psychologists should avoid acting as both treatment provider and objective evaluator for the same individual . this does not preclude a therapist from testifying as a fact witness about the patient treatment , although consideration should be given as to how such testimony might affect the therapeutic relationship . attorneys are required to advocate vigorously for their clients and expect the experts they retain to do the same . the attorney job is to persuade the trier of fact to find in favor of the party the attorney represents . this creates a conflict for the forensic evaluator , who must balance the demands of the advocacybased legal system with psychological ethics that require impartiality and not partisanship . the fact that the attorney is paying the expert and may hold out the promise of future work has the potential to further cloud these issues . the roles a psychologist can play in a personal injury evaluation are not limited to fact witness and expert witness . a psychologist might be retained as a consultant by an attorney . consultants do not evaluate the plaintiff or offer expert testimony . the role of the consultant is to provide expertise to the attorney in preparing and litigating the case . this might include reviewing and commenting on the plaintiff treatment records , assisting with jury selection , reviewing a report summarizing the examination completed by the opposing party expert , reviewing the depositions of the opposing party experts , providing questions for cross examination of opposing experts , and conducting research . professional ethics demand that psychologists avoid entering into relationships that could compromise their objectivity , competence , or effectiveness . because of this requirement , it is important to consider the potential impact of influences such as the therapeutic bond , financial remuneration , and personal persuasion . psychologists will find it easier to navigate these influences if they avoid multiple roles and remain focused on reaching opinions based on an unbiased and objective view of the evidence . once such opinions are reached , the psychologist can vigorously and persuasively advocate for his or her opinions , keeping in mind the distinction between advocating for an opinion and advocating for a party . as described by kane , the expert must resist this pressure , remaining impartial and advocating for his or her opinion , not for his or her retaining attorney . adequate basis for opinions . psychologists are required to base the opinions in reports and testimony on information and techniques sufficient to substantiate their findings . this is consistent with the requirements of the legal system that expert testimony meet certain standards , including that it be based on sufficient facts and data and reliable methods . this means that the evaluator must collect data that are comprehensive , relevant , and valid . in addition , data must be interpreted appropriately . the inferences made must be reasonable and based on the data that were collected . the sgfp stress the importance of utilizing multiple sources of data and attempting to corroborate data by comparing information across sources . in circumstances when such crossvalidation is not possible , resulting limitations should be identified . if the psychologist is not able to obtain sufficient data to reach an opinion on a given question , no opinion should be offered . it is also important to focus on collecting data that are relevant to the legal question at hand . relevant , in this context , is defined as evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence . only relevant evidence can be admitted . this distinction requires that the psychologist clearly understand the facts that are at issue and how data can be collected to address those facts specifically . collecting data that are not relevant wastes time and the financial resources of the retaining party . it also serves to confuse the issues and make it more difficult to reach and clearly explicate opinions . preventing misuse of findings . psychologists have an ethical obligation to ensure that their reports and testimony do not contain statements that are untrue or are likely to mislead others . section eleven of the sgfp provides more detailed guidance : forensic practitioners do not distort or withhold relevant evidence or opinion in reports or testimony . forensic practitioners do not , by either commission or omission , participate in the misrepresentation of their evidence , nor do they participate in partisan attempts to avoid , deny or subvert the presentation of evidence contrary to their own position or opinion . as noted earlier , attorneys are obligated to vigorously advocate for the parties they represent . as such , attorneys attempt to present evidence in a light most favorable to their clients positions . forensic psychologists must remain alert to attempts to present their findings in ways that may misleading the judge or jury by way of overemphasizing certain points or failing to acknowledge conflicting data . the forensic psychologist must also be sure that the retaining attorney does not misrepresent the psychologist credentials , training , or experience . it is important that the psychologist carefully review the expert disclosure before it is submitted to be sure that it does not misrepresent his or her opinions or overstate the certainty with which those opinions are held . nature of psychological damage . courts have long allowed claims based on physical harm , and all jurisdictions now allow claims of emotional harm proximately related to physical injuries . however , courts have been less receptive to claims based solely on psychological damage absent a physical injury . according to koch , neill , and douglas , courts have long been skeptical of claims of psychological injury because of fears that , without objective markers for the existence of mental health conditions , such disorders would be easy to fabricate . the ali defines harm in the context of tort law as the existence of loss or detriment of any kind to a person resulting from any cause . by extrapolation , this definition suggests that psychological damage has two elements : that there is a change in the plaintiff emotional functioning , and that this change can be attributed , at least in part , to the actions of another party . emotional functioning . it is important to point out that the term psychological damage is not synonymous with psychiatric diagnosis . greenberg , shuman , and meyer differentiated between the clinical issue of assigning a specific diagnostic label and using a diagnostic classification as the basis for a legal determinant : law does not make diagnosis an essential element of a claim or defense . instead , legal criteria for these actions are functional and concern themselves with impairment or capacity , without regard to diagnosis . furthermore , the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders cautions about its use in nonclinical settings . as described earlier in this chapter , the fit between clinical diagnostic data and legal questions is imperfect . in establishing the existence of psychological damage , functional capacity is more relevant than a diagnostic label . grisso defined functional capacity as that which an individual can do or accomplish , as well as the knowledge , understanding , or beliefs that may be necessary for that accomplishment . since functional capacity is distinct from diagnosis , it can not be assumed that the presence of a particular condition is necessarily related to a specific level of functioning . greenberg warned that substituting diagnosis for an analysis of functioning can be misleading , does not serve the purposes of the court , and has the potential to distort an objective assessment of the plaintiff . they noted that tort cases require a functional analysis of the plaintiff in order to understand how , if at all , the defendant actions have affected the plaintiff life . with the understanding that establishing a diagnosis is not required for a claim of psychological injury , there are some conditions that are commonly claimed by plaintiffs in tort cases . witt and weitz reported that the most common symptoms seen following motor vehicle accidents include chronic pain , depression , and anxiety . melton reported that the condition variously known as traumatic neurosis stress , ptsd stress , acute stress disorder is the most commonly observed mental injury in personal injury cases . koch listed ptsd , asd , and major depressive episode as conditions that may be the subject of personal injury litigation . kane pointed to ptsd as the most common diagnosis in personal injury cases . ptsd and asd occupy a unique position in the realm of psychiatric diagnoses , in that these conditions are by definition caused by an external event or circumstance . other conditions , such as depression and panic disorder , can be triggered by a traumatic experience , such as the death of a loved one , but they often arise in the absence of exogenous factors . in terms of personal injury evaluations , forensic experts are more likely to be presented with a diagnosis of ptsd than asd , as the symptoms of asd , according to the diagnostic criteria , resolve within a fourweek period . if the symptoms persist beyond this period , a diagnosis of ptsd would be considered . the type of trauma necessary for a diagnosis of ptsd is clearly outlined in criterion a of the dsm . the trauma must involve experiencing or witnessing an event characterized by actual or threatened death or serious injury or a threat to the integrity of self or others leading to a response of intense fear , helplessness , or horror . consider the following two scenarios : scenario one : while receiving treatment at an inpatient psychiatric facility , a woman was awakened during the night by a male employee who restrained her in her bed while he groped her breasts and genitals . he warned her not to tell anyone , or he would fix it so she would have to stay longer in the hospital , and besides , no one would take the word of a crazy person . scenario two : a man who was employed as an executive at a large corporation for a number of years was assigned to report to a new supervisor . he found himself frequently butting heads with his new boss , as they had very different approaches and personal styles . after four months , the man was called into his boss office without warning and fired . he was escorted to his office by security , allowed a few minutes to collect his personal belongings , and then escorted out of the building . both of these scenarios describe disturbing events that would be profoundly upsetting to most people . there is , however , a qualitative difference between the circumstances of scenario one and those of scenario two . the events described in the first scenario are consistent with the type of trauma outlined in criterion a , whereas the events described in the second scenario do not meet this criterion , as they do not involve actual or threatened death or serious injury or a threat to the integrity of self . koch recommended considering five questions about a traumatic event : was there a lifethreatening injury as a result of the traumatic event ? was there a physically disabling injury that could conceivably limit employment or accomplishment of important life goals ? did the individual witness a death or severe injury ? was there a realistic fear that the individual life was in danger despite no obvious traumatic injury ? was there some threat to their physical integrity ? if one or more of these questions is answered in the affirmative , it is likely that the event in question would meet the requirements of criterion a . it is important to remember , however , that the fact that an individual has experienced an extreme traumatic stressor does not necessarily mean that the individual will undoubtedly develop ptsd . brunello estimated that onethird of the population will be exposed to a trauma of this magnitude at some point in their lives , yet only ten percent to twenty percent will develop ptsd . ptsd is twice as common among women as among men . the traumas most commonly associated with ptsd are combat exposure among men and rape and sexual molestation among women . in the general population in the united states , the prevalence of ptsd has been estimated at eight percent . in addition to meeting the bar set by criterion a , a diagnosis of ptsd requires the presence of additional symptoms described in criteria b through f . these include persistently reexperiencing the traumatic event , avoiding stimuli associated with the trauma , and experiencing persistent symptoms of increased arousal . as noted by brunello , several of the symptoms of ptsd are not specific to that disorder and overlap with other mental health conditions , including major depressive disorder , anxiety disorders , and substance abuse , which makes diagnosis more complicated . nemeroff suggested that the presence of criterion c symptoms in the months following the trauma was most predictive of the development of ptsd . it should be noted that , even if symptoms of ptsd do appear , they may not persist for months or years . koch noted that , among most representative samples of ptsd sufferers , there is as much as fifty percent spontaneous remission within the first year after experiencing the traumatic event . however , as many as ten percent of those who do develop ptsd remain chronically distressed . the second element in the legal definition of harm is causality the attribution of changes in the plaintiff condition to a specific event . koch noted that it is not necessary to prove that an event in question is the sole cause of the plaintiff psychological injury , but it does have to be a contributing cause . in some cases , existing symptoms might be worsened or exacerbated but not caused by the event . conceptually , determining causality seems simple : compare the plaintiff current functioning with his or her functioning prior to the event . if there is a notable decrement in functional capacity , it must have been caused by the event in question . unfortunately , the practical reality is far from simple . assessing causality is clearly the most difficult task facing the forensic examiner in personal injury work . greenberg , otto , and long pointed out that no psychological test can reliably assess what the plaintiff functioning was like prior to the events in question or separate the effects of one trauma from another . establishing the plaintiff preinjury functioning in the absence of contemporaneously created , extensively detailed , objectively based records is extremely challenging . assessing causality is made more difficult if the plaintiff manifested compromised functioning or experienced other traumatic events prior to the events in question . consider the following example . the plaintiff , a twenty eightyearold woman , was in a car accident in which two people died . she filed a lawsuit alleging , among other things , that she suffered from ptsd as a result of the accident . as a child , the plaintiff was sexually abused by her alcoholic father . by high school , she was frequently skipping classes , developed substance abuse problems , and cut her arms and legs to cope with stress . she dropped out of school and moved in with an older boyfriend who physically assaulted her . she eventually moved out and was working part time in a fast food restaurant at the time of the accident . the woman described in this example has a history of multiple traumas predating the car accident . it is quite possible that her history of abuse led to the development of symptoms of psychological distress . her history also shows evidence of impaired functioning prior to the accident , as evidenced by her difficulty in school and reliance on inadequate coping strategies . despite this history , however , it is also possible that this woman suffered additional psychological damage as a result of the car accident . the difficulty for the examiner would be attempting to sort out which of her current symptoms are attributable to the accident and whether her functioning has been further compromised as a result . consider another scenario : the plaintiff , a thirty sixyearold man , was in a convenience store when an armed robber entered the store and threatened to shoot the clerk unless he gave him cash . the clerk complied and the robber left . the man subsequently filed a lawsuit against the owner of the convenience store , alleging that , as a result of this experience , he had developed panic disorder and depression so severe he was unable to leave his house . as a result , he lost his job as an accountant , a position that he had held for eight years . as a child , the man had been physically abused by his stepfather over a period of ten years . despite this , he had been successful in school , had finished college , and had earned a graduate degree . at the time of the robbery , he owned a home and was engaged . this case is an example of an eggshell plaintiff . despite his history of unimpaired functioning , the man experience of violent abuse at the hands of his stepfather made him especially vulnerable to the stress of the armed robbery . although his reaction was extreme , he may be entitled to compensation from the defendant for all the damage he suffered , even though it is in excess of what the average person would have experienced . practical issues . personal injury evaluations involve managing relationships with different parties including the plaintiff , the defendant , and their legal representatives . the nature of the evaluator relationship with each party , including the degree of contact and the flow of communication , varies depending on which party has retained his or her services . it is important for the evaluator to understand how to effectively manage these relationships . dealing with attorneys . in most cases , the forensic examiner is retained by the attorney who represents one of the parties in the litigation . contact usually is initiated by telephone . the attorney typically identifies the party he or she represents , describes the case in general terms , and inquires about the expert experience and knowledge as it relates to the issues involved . the attorney also identifies the other parties and attorney involved in the litigation to determine if the expert has a conflict of interest . the attorney then asks about the expert interest in accepting the referral . the expert should clarify the role he or she is expected to play that is , testifying expert or consultant to ensure that there are no misunderstandings . fees should be discussed in this initial conversation . the expert should request a financial retainer from the attorney along with a letter of agreement outlining the scope of the expert projected involvement and payment arrangements . the expert should request that the retaining attorney provide all available records relating to the case , but the expert should not begin working on the case until the retainer and letter of agreement have been received . it is important to understand that the attorney , not the examinee , is the expert client . as mentioned earlier , if the expert is to examine the plaintiff and offer testimony , the expert commitment is to objectivity and impartiality , not to advocating for the retaining attorney client . dealing with examinees . examinees may present differently depending on whether the examiner was retained by their own attorney or by the opposing attorney . when the examiner is retained by the plaintiff attorney , the plaintiff may approach the examination with the notion that the expert has been hired to help him out or to prove her case . sometimes plaintiffs assume the examiner will continue to treat them after the initial evaluation . by contrast , when the examiner has been retained by the defense , the plaintiff may be guarded , defensive , or even hostile as a result of assuming the examiner has been hired to attack his or her case . because of this , regardless of by whom the examiner has been hired , it is important for the examiner to help the plaintiff understand that he or she is objective and unbiased . before beginning the examination of the plaintiff , unless the examination has been courtordered , the expert must obtain the plaintiff informed consent . this is true even if the expert has been retained by the plaintiff own attorney . the plaintiff should be informed about the following : the context of the evaluation . if the plaintiff refuses to participate , the examiner should contact the retaining attorney to discuss how to proceed . throughout the examination , the expert needs to walk a fine line in terms of building sufficient rapport to conduct a productive evaluation while remaining clear that the purpose of the meeting is not therapeutic . the examiner can facilitate this process by expressing a desire to understand the plaintiff point of view , by emphasizing the expert role as an independent fact finder , and by treating the plaintiff in a professional and respectful manner . conducting the evaluation . the evaluation of the plaintiff should address the specific questions presented by the retaining attorney . these questions usually include one or more of these : does the plaintiff show evidence of a psychological injury ? sometimes this question will include asking the expert to comment on a specific diagnosis or to formulate a diagnostic impression . if the plaintiff shows symptoms or injuries , are they causally related to the actions of the defendant ? the expert may be asked to specify if the defendant actions were the sole cause , the primary cause , or a contributing cause of the plaintiff injuries . the expert may be asked to identify other events or circumstances that may have contributed to the plaintiff injuries . the expert may also be asked if the plaintiff own actions or inactions contributed to the damage he or she has suffered . how has the plaintiff functioning changed as a result of the claimed injury ? this question usually refers to changes in areas such as work capacity , educational performance , social relationships , family responsibilities , and selfcare . will the plaintiff need treatment ? the expert may be asked to identify the type of treatment and the frequency and duration of the treatment that is being recommended . as discussed earlier in this chapter , accurate opinions can be formulated only when the expert has collected data that are both relevant and sufficient . data collection is especially challenging in a personal injury evaluation , as the expert is expected to form an understanding of the plaintiff past as well as present condition . the use of multiple sources of data is essential in this process . by utilizing a variety of sources , the expert will be able to compare information across sources so as to obtain a more complete and objective understanding of the plaintiff condition and functional capacity . documents and background information . it is recommended that the expert review records prior to meeting with the plaintiff . doing this allows the expert to gain an understanding of the plaintiff and the circumstances leading to the lawsuit . it also allows the expert to identify areas to explore in greater detail when the plaintiff is interviewed . the records involved in any case will vary considerably in volume and nature , depending on the circumstances of the plaintiff , the details of the litigation , and the plaintiff history . typically , available records will fall into one of three categories : medical and mental health treatment records , educational and work records , and legal documents . especially when there is a large volume of records , it is often helpful to begin by organizing the records chronologically and creating a timeline of events , both before and after the claimed injury . doing this provides an overview of the plaintiff situation and will call attention to any gaps in the information that has been provided . written records can be especially useful in trying to understand the plaintiff baseline functioning , particularly when the examiner has access to school transcripts , standardized test scores , or psychological or psychoeducational evaluations that were performed prior to the events in question . treatment records , particularly if they are available both prior and subsequent to the claimed injury , can be valuable in understanding changes in the plaintiff emotional functioning . in reviewing legal documents associated with the case , it is often best to start with the formal complaint . this will lay out , from the plaintiff perspective , the events leading up to the lawsuit , including the nature of the injuries for which the plaintiff is seeking compensation . the plaintiff deposition can be another source of useful information . depositions tend to be quite detailed and cover topics including the plaintiff functioning prior to the alleged injury , the events leading to the alleged injury , and the plaintiff condition subsequent to the alleged injury . depositions of the plaintiff mental health treatment providers can help in understanding the plaintiff condition and progress in treatment . this is especially true if the actual treatment notes are handwritten and difficult to decipher and lacking in detail , to decipher or lacking in detail . clinical interview . the purpose of the clinical interview is twofold : to gather information from the plaintiff perspective about his or her history , events surrounding the injury , and events subsequent to the injury ; and to give the expert an opportunity to directly observe the plaintiff appearance , speech , affect and behavior . sufficient time should be allowed for these purposes . a thorough interview usually takes a minimum of three hours due to the breadth of information that should be covered . given the amount of information to be covered , it is important for the expert to maintain control over the structure of the interview . the examiner should focus on obtaining detailed descriptive information from the plaintiff about his or her functioning before and after the injury rather than asking the plaintiff to provide conclusive statements about his or her condition . for example , rather than asking the plaintiff do you think you have ptsd ? the examiner might ask the plaintiff to describe his or her daily life both before and after the events in question . it is useful to start with openended questions and then probe for specific details or examples as necessary . selfreported data can vary in accuracy for a variety of reasons , including the unreliability of memory and limitations in insight . several authors have suggested that the accuracy of selfreported data appears to be influenced by situational factors such as involvement in litigation or compensation seeking . leeshaley and williams , leeshaley , and djanogly reported that , in compensation situations , examinees were more likely to report superior premorbid functioning and poorer current functioning , and they were more likely to exaggerate the number and severity of their symptoms than examinees who were not seeking compensation . as an adjunct to the face to face interview and direct observation of the plaintiff , self report questionnaires and surveys can be used to record and document the plaintiff reported symptoms , complaints , and functional limitations . selfreport questionnaires should not be confused with psychological tests , in that the former were designed for treatment planning , have high face validity , and lack the means for assessing the validity of the examinee responses . because of these limitations , selfreport questionnaires are useful for collecting information , but they should not be considered objective evidence of valid symptoms . psychological testing . when psychologists are asked to examine a personal injury plaintiff , it is usually assumed that the examination will involve psychological testing . psychological testing can be a valuable source of information that can be used to both formulate and confirm hypotheses as well as to disconfirm hypotheses about psychological constructs relevant to the legal issue . melton described psychological testing as more relevant in personal injury evaluations than in any other forensic context , as many of the constructs measured by psychological tests are directly related to the assessment of distress and impairments in functional abilities . witt and weitz suggested that psychological testing can be useful in three ways : testing may be helpful in identifying the presence of personality disorders . such disorders are , by definition , present from early adulthood . therefore , unless the plaintiff is a child or an adolescent , symptoms of a personality disorder could be assumed to have been present and may have had an influence on the plaintiff functioning and adjustment , prior to the injury that is the subject of the litigation . psychological testing provides a standardized method for assessing the plaintiff current symptoms , by comparing the plaintiff symptom report to the reports of individuals in normal or clinical samples . psychological testing can help in determining if the plaintiff is exaggerating symptoms or otherwise dissimulating , through the use of standalone measures of response style as well as validity scales imbedded in multiscale inventories , such as those found in the mmpi two . despite the potential usefulness of psychological testing , no standard battery has been consistently identified in the literature for use in personal injury evaluations , and greenberg pointed out that not all personal injury examinations require the same assessment instruments . in making decisions about which , if any , psychological tests to use , these authors stressed the importance of using measures that validly assess the constructs they are designed to assess and noted that psychological tests are a method for generating hypotheses rather than for directly answering psycholegal questions . in addition , koch , douglas , nicholls , and neill cautioned that many of the tests commonly employed in clinical and forensic assessment may not have been evaluated scientifically in an ecologically valid manner for the population being assessed in a personal injury evaluation . several researchers have studied the frequency in which specific psychological tests are used in various forensic contexts . the mmpi was the most frequently named instrument in these surveys . boccaccini and brodsky , for example , found the mmpi was used in eighty nine percent of emotional injury cases by the psychologists who responded to their survey . ultimately , the decision regarding which tests to select for a given evaluation is left to the examiner . a good starting point is to consider the psycholegal questions the evaluation is to address . generally , these questions involve : understanding the plaintiff preevent functioning , understanding the plaintiff current functioning , and determining the credibility of the plaintiff presentation during the evaluation . as pointed out by koch , nader , and haring , although psychological testing can be very useful in evaluating the plaintiff current mental health functioning , there is no scientific support for the use of psychological testing to make definitive statements about an individual functioning at some time in the past . psychological testing may , however , be helpful in gathering information about sustained patterns of functioning that , when used in conjunction with data obtained from collateral sources , can provide some insight into the plaintiff preinjury capacities . in assessing the plaintiff current emotional functioning , multiscale inventories , such as the mmpi two and the personality assessment inventory , are particularly useful as these instruments facilitate an assessment of a broad range of psychopathology . in addition , these tests include sophisticated scales for the detection of exaggerated or other distorted response styles . when selecting instruments to address the plaintiff response style , the nature of the plaintiff reported symptoms should be considered . in addition to the embedded validity scales in instruments like the mmpi and the pai , standalone measures such as the structured interview of reported symptoms , the miller forensic assessment of symptoms test , and the structured inventory of malingered symptomatology can be used . rosen and powel explored the use of a neuropsychological forcedchoice symptom validity test to detect symptom exaggeration in ptsd . they recommended including one of these instruments in forensic evaluations of ptsd if the plaintiff reports problems with memory or concentration . regardless of the methods employed , it is important to remember that no test exists that can prove the plaintiff is malingering . wellvalidated measures of symptom overendorsement can provide useful information about the plaintiff approach to the assessment , but they are not sufficient grounds for inferring malingering . collateral data . the use of collateral or thirdparty data is an established principle of forensic mental health assessment . collateral data can help to fill in information that is absent in the plaintiff selfreport , help the expert to form a clearer picture of the plaintiff functioning prior to the injury , and corroborate information obtained from the plaintiff during the interview and from psychological testing . there are many potential sources of collateral data . the specific sources selected will vary depending on the type of information the expert is seeking , the plaintiff situation , and the availability and willingness of sources to provide data . in general , the plaintiff authorization should be sought before contacting or interviewing collateral sources ; however , the plaintiff consent may not be necessary when the examination has been courtordered . collateral data , like other forms of data , are vulnerable to distortion and misinterpretation . heilbrun , warren , and picarello described issues that can limit the accuracy of information obtained from collateral sources . these include reluctance to participate in the evaluation , bias , lack of specific expertise , suggestibility , and memory loss . similar to the approach used when interviewing the plaintiff , interviews with collateral sources should focus on obtaining descriptions of the plaintiff behavior as observed by the collateral source rather than conclusions about the plaintiff condition . this information is best solicited with openended questions about the source observations of the plaintiff followed by probing for specific examples to support the general statements . interpretation of findings . as noted by witt and weitz , personal injury evaluations are challenging because the evaluator is attempting to retrospectively reconstruct the plaintiff mental condition before , during and after an event or series of events . although an assessment of current psychological functioning is important , the main thrust of the evaluation is on discerning whether a change in adjustment occurred at some time in the past and whether this was caused by some prior event . koch pointed out that , although it is possible to evaluate the plaintiff current emotional functioning and provide descriptive information about his or her past functioning based on information provided by the plaintiff , written records , and collateral sources , there is no scientifically sound method for determining that the plaintiff current condition was definitively caused by a specific event in the past . that said , the expert is often expected to offer some opinions as to the plaintiff current condition and the relationship of this condition to the actions of the defendant . because causality is an ultimate issue question , not all courts permit experts to testify about causality . establishing damage . as discussed earlier in this chapter , establishing damage is not synonymous with assigning a diagnostic label . in order to establish damage , three factors must be considered : does the plaintiff manifest symptoms of psychological distress that affect his or her ability to function ? are these symptoms and functional impairments valid ? are these symptoms and functional impairments different from what the plaintiff was experiencing prior to the events leading to the lawsuit ? applying psychology to civil proceedings . in addressing these questions , it is helpful to aggregate information from interviews , records , and testing regarding the plaintiff past and present functioning and to consider each reported symptom and functional impairment separately . for example , if the plaintiff claims that since his accident , he has been too depressed to leave the house most days , the expert can review the plaintiff treatment records , employment records , and information obtained from collateral sources to establish if the impairments the plaintiff is claiming were present prior to the accident . next , the expert can examine test data , collateral information , and current treatment records to determine if these impairments are currently present . the expert should note specific examples and test findings that address each symptom and impairment in functioning that the plaintiff reports , examples or test findings that address each symptom and impairment in functioning that the plaintiff reports . doing this allows the expert to corroborate specific pieces of information rather than attempting to confirm or disconfirm a particular diagnosis . if requested by the retaining attorney , once the expert has reviewed these data and has reached some opinions about symptoms and impairments that are currently present , the expert can consider whether the plaintiff symptoms relate to a specific diagnosis . this can be accomplished by reviewing each diagnostic criterion to determine if evidence exists that the plaintiff meets that criterion . as noted earlier in this chapter , damage must be related to a change in the plaintiff functioning , not just the existence of a valid diagnosis . the expert must consider how the plaintiff ability to carry out important functions in his or her daily life has changed as a result of the emotional injury . consideration of functional impairments should always be based on the capacity of the plaintiff prior to the injury . addressing causality . psychological problems are almost always multidetermined . genetic predisposition , early experiences , physiology , social support , substance abuse or exposure , culture , stress , injury , and disease may all play a role to one degree or another . therefore , it is impossible to say with certainty that a particular event was the sole cause of an individual symptoms . in attempting to address issues of causality , four factors can be considered : did the plaintiff symptoms arise subsequent to the events in question ? did the plaintiff experience other traumas that might have contributed to the development of the symptoms ? are other conditions present that could explain , at least in part , the symptoms the plaintiff is experiencing ? has there been a notable change in the plaintiff functional capacity subsequent to the events in question ? by considering this information , the evaluator can begin to formulate opinions about the likelihood that the observed changes in the plaintiff are proximately related to the actions of the defendant . communication of the expert opinion may be accomplished in several different ways . these include the expert disclosure , a written report , a deposition conducted by the opposing party , and testimony at trial . expert disclosure . once the examination is complete and the expert has formed opinions about the plaintiff , the retaining attorney should be contacted by telephone . the examiner should not write a report until this conversation takes place . after speaking to the expert , the attorney may decide that the examiner opinion will not be helpful to his or her case and will not want a report . if the attorney determines that the expert testimony would be useful , the attorney will request a written report . the attorney may also discuss an expert disclosure , which may be submitted prior to the report being completed . although this document will most often be prepared by the attorney , the expert should carefully review the disclosure before it is submitted to ensure that his or her opinion has not been misrepresented or misconstrued . written report . as long as this required information is included , the actual format and organization of the report is left to the expert . a suggested format that includes all the required elements follows . the reader may also wish to consult weiner for a more indepth discussion of forensic report writing . subject of expert opinion . the report should begin with a paragraph identifying the party who retained the expert and a brief statement describing the purpose of the evaluation . summary of expert opinion . a list of the expert opinions that will be presented in the report should follow . qualifications . then the expert should provide one or two paragraphs describing his or her academic and experiential credentials as related to the case . the final sentence should state that a copy of the expert curriculum vitae is attached to the report as an addendum . the cv must contain a listing of the expert publications . data sources . this section should list all the records the expert reviewed , the examination procedures , and any collateral interviews . summary of information obtained from records . this section summarizes the content of the records reviewed by the expert . examination of the plaintiff . this section contains behavioral observations of the plaintiff , summary of the history of the events as reported by the plaintiff , the plaintiff description of his or her injuries and functional impairments , and psychometric test results . expert opinion . this section is a full description and rationale for each opinion listed under the summary of expert opinion . each opinion should be supported by examples from the records , interviews and test finding , interviews or test finding . signature . the report must be signed by the expert . addenda . addenda should include the expert cv , a list of cases in which sworn testimony has been provided in the previous four years , and an invoice or other documentation of the compensation the expert has received from the retaining attorney . sometimes the retaining attorney will ask for a draft report before the final version is sent . it is acceptable for an attorney to point out grammatical or factual errors in a draft report or to suggest that something be explained more fully or clearly . it is not acceptable , however , for the attorney to suggest changes in the examiner opinions . the examiner has a duty to carefully maintain all documentation , notes , and raw data from the evaluation , including information in electronic format , as most of this material is discoverable . some communications between the retaining attorney and the expert may fall under the workproduct exemption from discovery . in the federal court system , discovery is governed by frcp twenty six . the workproduct exemption allows an attorney to protect materials prepared in anticipation of litigation from discovery by the opposing attorney , including material prepared by expert witnesses . it does not protect the examiner opinions , qualifications , prior testimony , compensation received , or data provided to the expert by the attorney all of which are subject to discovery . rule twenty six was amended in two thousand and ten to provide greater protection from discovery . under this revision , draft reports and communications between the attorney and the expert may be exempt from discovery . it is important to remember that each jurisdiction has different rules regarding discovery . ultimately it is up to the judge to determine what is and is not exempt from discovery . because of this fact , the best practice is to assume that everything is discoverable unless told otherwise by the judge . it is very likely that the opposing attorney will want to depose the expert in order to discover additional information about the examiner opinions and the foundation for these opinions . this is also an opportunity for the opposing attorney to size up the expert in order to get a sense of how effectively the expert would testify at a trial . typically the examiner will receive a subpoena commanding appearance for a deposition and to bring everything in the examiner possession relating to the case . a deposition , in which the expert will provide sworn testimony , might last for as little as an hour or as long as several days . the opposing attorney , the retaining attorney , and a court reporter will be present . sometimes the plaintiff attends the deposition as well . the rules of the deposition are explained at the outset . briefly , all answers must be verbal . if a question is not understood , the witness should ask for clarification before answering . the retaining attorney may enter an objection for the record , but the witness is expected to answer the question regardless . it is important for the witness to listen carefully to each question and to answer truthfully and succinctly . occasionally , the opposing attorney may attempt to provoke the witness to see how the witness might react on the stand . if this happens , the best course of action is to remain calm and avoid reacting emotionally . the use of anger or humor is not recommended . at the end of the deposition , the witness is asked if he or she wants to waive signature . the best answer to this question is no , in response to which the deposition transcript will be sent to the witness , who will have an opportunity to correct any errors that were made in recording his or her testimony or errors made by the witness . typically , the expert time spent at the deposition is paid by the attorney conducting the deposition , whereas preparation time usually is paid by the attorney who retained the expert . courtroom testimony . many personal injury cases do not end up going to trial . the parties can agree to a settlement at any time , including during the trial . if the expert is required to testify in court , it is helpful to review the deposition transcript beforehand . if there are any discrepancies between the testimony given at deposition and the expert testimony at trial , the opposing attorney will almost certainly point this out . the examiner report should form the basis for his or her testimony . the retaining attorney will directly examine the examiner using openended questions . in general , it is usually a good idea to review the report with the attorney ahead of time to ensure that the attorney understands the opinions and will ask questions that will facilitate the expert explaining his or her opinion to the judge and jury . applying psychology to civil proceedings . during testimony , the expert should speak clearly and avoid using jargon . ideally , the expert should exude a competent , respectful , professional , yet approachable demeanor . after the direct examination is completed , the opposing attorney will crossexamine the expert . the cross examination is intended to expose flaws in the expert opinion or to raise questions about the expert credibility . it is important for the expert to listen to all questions carefully before answering . if either attorney objects during direct or cross examination , the expert should say nothing until the objection has been resolved by the judge . if the objection is sustained , the question must be answered . whether responding to questions under direct or cross examination , the expert should always keep in mind that his or her primary obligation is to serve the court by giving truthful , unbiased testimony . psychologists must be aware of the limits of their science , especially in terms of extrapolating from the present examination of the plaintiff to inferences about the plaintiff functioning at some time in the past or predictions about his or her future condition . in order to be admissible , the evidence given by the expert witness must be relevant to the legal questions at issue and based on sound science . it is important to not overstate the certainty of one opinions , to acknowledge conflicting data , and to give consideration to alternative hypotheses . 