accessing the law and legal literature . the term forensic mental health assessment refers to the process by which mental health professionals typically psychologists , psychiatrists , and social workers conduct evaluations for the court and at the request of attorneys , court and at the request of attorneys . the goal of these evaluations is to facilitate better informed legal decision making by a court or to assist attorneys in their representation of a client . in contrast to general clinical assessments in which the referral question is necessarily clinical in nature , the referral question in fmhas is guided by a specific legal issue defined by a law within the jurisdiction in which the assessment occurs . given the nature of fmhas , it is incumbent on the mental health professional conducting such an assessment to be familiar with the applicable law in the jurisdiction and the particular legal question at issue in the case . indeed , section two of the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology underscores the necessity for clinicians conducting fmhas to possess knowledge and understanding of the legal and professional standards , laws , rules and precedents that govern participation in legal proceedings . moreover , a large portion of the questions on the written examination for board certification in forensic psychology by the american board of forensic psychology assess clinicians knowledge of laws , precedents , court rules , civil procedures , criminal procedures , and judicial practices . similarly , board certification for forensic psychiatrists includes , among other requirements , passing an examination that focuses on criminal law , civil law , legal regulation of psychiatry , and other legal topics . in this chapter , we present an overview of conducting legal research , with a specific eye toward mental health professionals who do not have any formal legal training . we begin by discussing the importance of understanding the law , particularly for those mental health professionals who conduct fmhas . then we provide an overview of the law in the united states , which includes a discussion of various sources of law and the structure of the state and federal court systems . next , we describe specific methods for conducting legal research highlighting both formal and informal approaches using a variety of databases and research tools . we then discuss how to read and interpret the law , which is not an entirely obvious process . finally , after discussing how to ensure that the law found through legal research is good law , we conclude this chapter by describing effective ways of synthesizing the accumulated legal research . because law is established through multiple sources in the united states , acquiring legal knowledge can be a complicated , tedious , and admittedly intimidating process . fortunately , finding and understanding the law may be accomplished in a variety of formal and informal ways . in addition to examining primary and secondary sources of law such as case law , statutes , administrative codes , and a variety of legally relevant publications it is possible to gain proficiency with legal issues through discussions with attorneys and consultation with colleagues and by staying abreast of the relevant behavioral science literature . by possessing a strong legal background , a forensic mental health professional is better able to identify the legal question and relevant forensic issue in a particular case . in turn , this legal knowledge guides the structure of the evaluation , specifies domains upon which the evaluation should concentrate , informs appropriateness of assessment tools , and helps structure the communication of one findings . prior to developing a methodological approach to conducting an fmha , the clinician should possess a thorough understanding of the law applicable to the case . from that law flows the questions that will be addressed by the mental health expert . however , because legal definitions are not tantamount to psychological concepts , an important element in conducting an fmha entails translating legal language about functional capacities and behavior into relevant measurable constructs . for example , no equivalent solitary constructs exist in the mental health sciences for legal terms such as knowing , intelligent , and voluntary . experts conducting fmhas must therefore operationalize these legal concepts in a way that permits them to be meaningfully measured . as another example , a forensic practitioner must translate competence to stand trial into elements that can be assessed . additionally , although it is generally true that the law does not presume that any psychiatric diagnostic condition is synonymous with any legal incompetency , in some jurisdictions , the law specifies a direct link between a diagnostic condition and a legal outcome . this distinction has clear implications for the structure of an fmha , and it requires forensic mental health professionals to be familiar with the relevant law.in most forensic contexts , a clinical diagnosis is not sufficient to answer the legal question , so an individual functional legal capacities must be analyzed to relate his or her observable abilities to the relevant legal concept . these functional abilities must be relevant to the legal question and causally related to a clinical disorder . a mental health professional must therefore understand the legal question to be able to operationalize and identify the relevant forensic issues and functional legal capacities and to develop an appropriate structure for the assessment . there is , however , at least one circumstance in which a clinical diagnosis constitutes the ultimate legal issue . specifically , in atkins virginia , the us supreme court categorically excluded offenders with mental retardation from capital punishment on the grounds that executing such offenders would violate the eighth amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment . in cases such as this in which a brightline rule has been established , the structure of the fmha is relatively straightforward . however , in the majority of forensic evaluation contexts , no brightline rule applies , and the evaluator must devise a more complex methodology that incorporates relevant legal questions , an examination of the evaluee underlying psychopathology , and an assessment of the evaluee relevant functional legal capacities . a forensic mental health professional who knows relevant laws and who can identify the forensic issues is in a good position to focus an fmha on specific content domains . for example , by specifying the forensic issues and relevant functional abilities , a forensic mental health professional can narrow the scope of an evaluation by asking questions and administering tests that yield data directly relevant to the legal issue . similarly , the evaluator will be better equipped to focus on important domains during collateral interviews and while reviewing legal documents . although many types of fmha require a circumscribed assessment of a small number of clinically relevant domains , other types of fmhas such as child custody and capital mitigation require a much broader assessment that focuses on a number of areas . here again , appropriately appraising the legal question and relevant forensic issues drives the focus of the evaluation . once the relevant forensic issues are identified , the clinician must select a specific assessment approach to examine the evaluee functional legal capacities . a combination of nomothetic and idiographic data should be collected to assess clinical condition , functional abilities , and a causal connection between the two . the clinician formulation of the relevant forensic issues should inform his or her selection of appropriate forensic assessment instruments . clinical assessment instruments that address constructs relevant to criminal and civil cases may also be used in the evaluation . the forensic mental health professional must also strive to ensure that his or her testimony will likely be deemed admissible in court under applicable evidentiary standards . these evidentiary standards compel forensic evaluators both to select well validated psychological assessment instruments and be familiar with the psychometric properties of the tools they use . rule seven hundred and two of the federal rules of evidence and the us supreme court decision in daubert merrell dow pharmaceuticals stress relevance and reliability as the critical elements for the acceptance of scientific evidence in court . although the federal court system and the majority of states have adopted the evidentiary admissibility standard outlined in daubert , the less stringent frye admissibility standard is still used in several jurisdictions . the frye general acceptance standard states that for scientific evidence to be admissible in court , the procedure from which the evidence is deduced must be sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance within the relevant scientific community ; of note , it is the procedures used to obtain the scientific evidence , not the evidence itself , that must be generally accepted . importantly , a forensic mental health professional conducting an fmha may be held to different criteria depending on which evidentiary standard applies in the jurisdiction in which an evaluation occurs . as such , it is crucial that forensic mental health professionals consider the relevant evidentiary standards when selecting measures and scientific approaches for conducting the evaluation to ensure that their testimony will be admissible in court . in addition to guiding evaluation procedures , knowledge of relevant laws plays a key role in shaping conclusions and communication of findings in fmhas . with respect to forming opinions , some jurisdictions prohibit testimony on the ultimate legal issue , reserving this role exclusively for the legal decision maker . for example , although testimony on the ultimate legal issue is permitted under the fre , expert witnesses in federal criminal trials are not permitted to state an opinion about whether the defendant did or did not have a mental state or condition that constitutes an element of the crime charged or an element of a defense to the crime . because jurisdictional rules regarding ultimate issue testimony may differ , it is crucial that forensic mental health professionals are well versed in the laws of the jurisdiction so they avoid overstepping their boundaries . moreover , even in jurisdictions that allow a forensic mental health professional to answer the ultimate legal issue , current bestpractice standards suggest that practitioners nonetheless refrain from offering ultimate issue testimony . as discussed later in this chapter , various laws are relevant to fmhas , which underscores the need for forensic mental health professionals to possess legal knowledge relevant to their practice . unfortunately , however , as heilbrun notes , many clinicians falsely espouse the belief that a good clinical evaluation will serve in forensic cases , while others fail to distinguish properly between different forensic issues . such oversight has led some courts to become disenchanted with the field of forensic mental health and for some judges to express concern that forensic mental health professionals have failed to deliver what the legal system needs . this has led to a growing literature regarding various concerns about fmhas , many of which appear to be directly related to forensic mental health professionals lack of sufficient legal knowledge . prominent criticisms highlighted by grisso over twenty five years ago include ignorance and irrelevance , intrusion into matters of law , and insufficiency and incredibility of information . each of these concerns is briefly discussed . clinician ignorance of the laws driving a particular evaluation and the subsequent irrelevance of their data are of clear relevance to this discussion . as previously described , some degree of legal knowledge is a necessary precursor to devising and conducting a highquality fmha . lacking a sufficient understanding of pertinent laws may preclude a forensic clinician from identifying the relevant forensic issues and functional legal capacities in a particular case . clinicians who do not possess adequate legal knowledge may present findings that are irrelevant to the legal question . for example , a common mistake is to substitute a clinical diagnosis for a calculated analysis of a functional ability . notwithstanding the previously discussed atkins exception wherein a clinical diagnosis constitutes the ultimate legal issue , normative diagnostic testimony exclusively concerning a mental health disorder highlights grisso concerns relating to ignorance and irrelevance . organizations such as the american psychology law society and the american academy of forensic psychology have worked to correct this type of oversight by publishing guidelines that emphasize the responsibility of forensic mental health professionals to understand the legal standards pertaining to an evaluation and how these standards relate to clinical practice . the second concern highlighted by grisso intrusion into matters of law is driven primarily by lack of sufficient legal knowledge . this particular mistake generally occurs when forensic mental health professionals inappropriately provide testimony on the ultimate legal issue . there is a vigorous debate within the forensic psychology field regarding whether it is appropriate for forensic experts to answer the ultimate legal question in a particular case . some scholars have argued that providing ultimate issue testimony is not problematic because many judges and attorneys request forensic clinicians opinions on the ultimate legal question , whereas others counsel against answering the ultimate legal question because it represents an inappropriate intrusion into the domain of the legal fact finder . these scholars argue that because an opinion on an ultimate legal issue can not be rendered without consideration of morals and values , experts conducting fmhas should not stray from their role in offering psychological testimony and opinions related to clinical condition , functional legal capacities , and the relation between the two . the third concern highlighted by grisso concerns the insufficiency and lack of credibility of some clinicians reports , which is likely caused at least in part by an insufficient grasp of the relevant legal issues . specifically , clinicians conducting fmhas have been criticized for drawing conclusions that have insufficient supporting evidence and rendering opinions that lack credibility . it would seem that a clinician well versed in the evidentiary standards and other laws applicable in the evaluation jurisdiction would be much less likely to offer conclusions based on insufficient scientific evidence . fortunately , recent developments in the scientific approaches used to conduct fmhas and improvements in the law theoretically should reduce the incidence of insufficient and incredible testimony . however , testimony that relies on speculation and illsupported or novel theories is unfortunately not uncommon and is often presented in court as fact , which leads to confusion or mistaken beliefs among legal decision makers . all of these issues and concerns underscore the need for clinicians interested in conducting fmhas to possess an understanding of the law and the ability to appropriately apply such knowledge in forensic contexts . by enhancing their knowledge of relevant laws and becoming more aware of how to conduct legal research , forensic mental health professionals can take an important step toward becoming more competent providers of fmhas , which will in turn provide attorneys and courts with more useful information . the net result will be a legal system that makes betterinformed decisions . fortunately , efforts undertaken by experts and organizations in the field have helped mitigate problems associated with fmhas . nevertheless , there remains a need to continue working to improve the competence of forensic mental health professionals and the overall quality of fmhas , and a good starting point in that undertaking is having a solid understanding of the law . laws come from a variety of sources and appear in various formats . for this and other reasons , looking up the law sometimes can be a surprisingly convoluted process . it is not uncommon for novice researchers or those without formal legal training to struggle when first conducting legal research . fortunately , as any firstyear law student would likely attest , there is a profound learning curve when it comes to conducting legal research . we have written this section , and the entire chapter for that matter , to help bend that learning curve in a favorable direction.in the united states , multiple entities provide the laws that govern society , but two main forces are typically at play : the federal government and state governments . due to the tenth amendment , the federal government and state governments have separate powers , and states are sovereign in many respects . both the federal government and state governments can be subdivided into their respective legislative , judicial , and executive branches . as with the overarching governmental structures , a separation of powers also exists among the three branches of the government . put simply , the legislative branch creates statutes , the judicial branch interprets those statutes via case law , and the executive branch creates administrative agencies that carry out the law and enact regulations . the law created by the executive branch , which is often in the form of an executive order issued by the president or a state governor , is of limited utility to forensic mental health professionals , so here we focus primarily on statutes , case law , and constitutional law . statutory law . when many people envision what a law looks like , they may imagine some code or subsection with a potentially long string of numbers . for example , a law might be referenced as eighteen usc ยง two thousand, three hundred and fortya . this type of law the law on the books or black letter law is referred to as statutory law . statutory law flows from statutes enacted by legislatures , at either the federal level or the state level . these statutes are then compiled into federal or state codes , which we discuss in more detail later in the chapter . many statutes are quite old , having been enacted decades ago and having never been revised . others are comparatively young for example , statutes enacted by legislative authority to address emerging concerns or new issues not previously covered under statute . statutes may also be revised by the issuing authority to address concerns relating to content or scope . legislatures may also revise statutes in reaction to recent judicial decisions about how a statute is to be interpreted . case law . after a statute is enacted , the courts are responsible for interpreting and applying that statutory law in the context of specific disputes , which means that courts are also a source of law . in the process of applying the law , the courts determine where and when the statute applies , whether there are any exceptions to its application , and how vague statutory language should be interpreted . if a court goes so far as to declare a statute invalid , then the statute must be revised by the legislature before it can legally be applied . assuming , however , that the statute is not invalidated , courts will apply the statute in the context of legal disputes . as the courts interpret and apply a statute one case at a time , collections of judicial decisions amass . these decisions are referred to as case law or common law . judges may choose to follow this legal precedent , interpreting the law similarly to judges who have already reviewed the issue . however , a judge may choose to depart from precedent altogether or identify the case before the court as factually distinct and therefore not guided by precedent . in so doing , the courts create new case law . new case law may simply answer previously unanswered legal questions , or it may effectively change the law in the jurisdiction , even if no new statute has been enacted . the third major source of law is constitutions . constitutions provide specific rights and protections and are often the authority on which courts rely when invalidating a statute . in the united states , individuals are protected by both the us constitution and their individual state constitution . individuals are protected by constitutions , and the legislatures , courts , and executive agencies are bound by constitutions . in that sense , constitutions largely protect individuals by limiting governmental power . many state constitutions closely parallel the us constitution , but that pattern is more convention or convenience than requirement . rather , state constitutions may differ from the us constitution , with one very important caveat : state constitutions may not provide less protection than the us constitution , although they may provide more protection.the three major sources of law discussed thus far are all considered to be primary sources because they are the sources that effectively make the law . in addition to these primary sources , there are secondary sources of law . broadly speaking , secondary sources can be anything describing or summarizing the law that do not fall into one of the aforementioned primary sources . thus , secondary sources may include books purchased at a local bookstore , internet articles or forums discussing a topic of law , or even video or audio recordings . speaking more narrowly , though , there are a few specific secondary legal sources to which legal researchers often turn . legal dictionaries provide the meaning and typical use of legal terms and phrases . legal encyclopedias provide broad and general information on a specific topic of law , and they are much like a traditional encyclopedia in both breadth and depth . moving from the general to the specific , legal treatises are entire books devoted to one area of law , which means they have much less breadth than legal encyclopedias but considerably more depth . hornbooks are a specific type of treatise . although hornbooks are traditionally written to help law students navigate through an unfamiliar area of the law , they are helpful for anyone new to a specific area . nutshells are another type of treatise , similarly devoted to one area of law , but with an emphasis on conciseness . last , the restatements of law are an effort by the american law institute to organize , summarize , and codify the common law of the united states . covering fifteen separate areas , the restatements sometimes straddle the line between primary and secondary sources . whereas they are in themselves a secondary source because they synthesize the law in a given area , it is not unusual for judges to rely on the restatements as persuasive authority in deciding a novel legal issue . secondary sources of law can be tremendously helpful to both novice and expert legal researchers . an individual who must investigate an unfamiliar area of law might begin with a secondary source to get a broad overview of the law , which will provide insight as to how he or she should go about researching primary source material . someone who feels confident in his or her primary source research may turn later to secondary sources of law as a final step to ensure that nothing has been overlooked . of course , there is no reason why the two sources of law can not be used simultaneously . having reviewed primary and secondary sources of law , an important note is worth highlighting for the forensic mental health professional . because there are multiple sources of law , comprehensive legal research involves more than simply looking up the relevant guiding statute . researching beyond the statute for example , by looking at case law to see how courts have applied and interpreted the statute is particularly important if the statute has not been revised in many years or if there is reason to believe that it is no longer good law , which is a concept we discuss later in this chapter . a forensic mental health professional engaging in best practices should be familiar with relevant statutory law and case law on a given legal question , and that task can be accomplished more easily by utilizing the secondary legal sources just described . having explored where law comes from , it is also necessary to understand which laws are applied by which courts . just as the united states has two major government systems that make the law , so too does it have two major court systems to apply those laws : federal courts and state courts . each court system can be generally divided again into criminal and civil courts . state courts hear state matters : crimes violating state law and civil disputes arising between residents of the same state . federal courts hear federal matters : crimes violating federal law and civil disputes arising between residents of different states . criminal courts handle trials brought by the government against an individual . because a crime is viewed as an offense against society , the state or federal prosecutor is responsible for bringing charges against a defendant , and he or she reserves the right to drop or amend those charges ; there are no private prosecutions in the united states . as civil matters arise between two parties , it is the responsibility of those parties to mount both the offense and the defense . although the typical parties in a civil case are individuals , companies , or corporations , the state can also be party to certain civil proceedings that have relevance to forensic practice . for example , the state is party to a civil commitment proceeding in which an individual may be involuntarily committed to a psychiatric facility if he or she is a danger to self or others . the state is also responsible for challenging parental rights in cases of child abuse or neglect , which are also handled in civil court . because so many legal questions are answered in the civil courtroom , civil courts are subdivided into various levels , and the civil court system contains a variety of specialized courts , such as probate courts , family courts , and landlord tenant courts . although this organization may seem fairly clearcut , various complications can make jurisdiction confusing in both criminal and civil matters . indeed , there are entire courses in many law schools dedicated exclusively to the topic of jurisdiction . a few examples regarding criminal jurisdiction may help illuminate some of the complexities relating to it . murder , for example , is typically characterized as a crime against the state . however , if the murder victim was a federal employee for example , a postal worker or undercover federal bureau of investigation agent then that murder would be tried in federal court . in addition to the victim , the location of the crime can also play a role in determining jurisdiction . using illegal drugs is typically a state offense . however , if someone commits a drug offense in yosemite national park , he or she would be prosecuted for that offense in federal court . as one last example , stealing a car is typically a state offense . if , however , that stolen car is subsequently driven across state lines , it would become a federal offense prosecuted in federal court . within the federal and state court systems , the courts are further subdivided into hierarchies or tiers . typically a case is heard at the lowest tier in its relevant jurisdiction , which is called the court of first instance because it is the first court to hear the case . however , through a process of appeals , cases may move up the hierarchy to be reviewed by courts of greater authority . because both the state and federal court systems have respective tiers and exist parallel to one another , one can conceptualize the us court system as a wide staircase with an iron handrail running up the middle . on one side of the rail lie the federal courts , and the state court system lies on the other side of the rail ; the lowest step is the court of first instance , and the top step is the highest court that has the final say on an issue . typically , cases remain on one side of the rail or the other , but there are instances in which they may jump over the rail from one system to the other . in the state court system , the first level of courts contains the trial courts of limited jurisdiction . these courts , whose names differ among jurisdictions , handle relatively minor judicial matters , such as parking tickets , vandalism , and accrued fines . also on the first level are the trial courts of general jurisdiction . trial courts of general jurisdiction handle the vast majority of cases , both criminal and civil . a trial court purpose is to determine the facts of the case and settle the dispute . criminal trial courts apply penalties such as fines , judicially supervised release , incarceration , and death . civil trial courts apply penalties that are typically limited to monetary damages and injunctions . moving one step up from the trial courts but remaining in the state court system are the intermediate appellate courts . appellate courts have appellate jurisdiction , which means that they hear cases that have been appealed . if a party is dissatisfied with the trial court ruling , the party may attempt to appeal the case up to the appellate court . however , not all cases are eligible for appeal , and being eligible for an appeal does not guarantee that the appeal will be granted . grounds for appeal vary by case and jurisdiction , but they often involve procedural error . simply being unhappy with having lost the case is not sufficient grounds to be granted an appeal . rather , the case must have an appealable issue. toward that end , appellate courts rarely reexamine the facts of the case . rather , an appellate court , having granted an appeal , will examine and address whether the trial court correctly applied the law in arriving at a verdict and penalty . in this sense , appellate courts are said to resolve issues of law , not issues of fact . at the highest step in the state court system , each state has its high court , which most states call the state supreme court . the state supreme court is also an appellate court inasmuch as it only hears cases for which it has granted an appeal . in fact , several states lack the aforementioned intermediate appellate courts . in those states , an appeal granted after a trial court case would be heard directly by the state high court . in states with an intermediate appellate court , the high court would only hear a case that has been adjudicated at the trial level , answered on appeal at the intermediate level , and then appealed again to the state high court . in most states , the state high court is a discretionary court , meaning it is not required to hear any cases on appeal and only decides cases that it accepts . typically , once the state high court rules on an issue , its decision is final . however , it is possible that a case resolved at the state high court can be reheard in the federal court system . we address this topic after covering the federal court system . it is worth noting that states often have different names for the trial , appellate , and high courts in their jurisdictions . for example , in new jersey , the trial court is the superior court , the intermediate appellate court is the superior court appellate division , and the high court is the new jersey supreme court . in pennsylvania , the trial court is the court of common pleas , the intermediate appellate court is the superior court , and the high court is the pennsylvania supreme court . perhaps most confusing , in new york , the trial courts are the state supreme courts , the intermediate appellate courts are the appellate courts , and the high court is the new york court of appeals . the federal court system also arranges courts in hierarchical fashion . at the first step , the lowest federal courts are the district courts , which function much like state trial courts . one major difference , though , is that whereas a state trial court has only one judge presiding , a federal district court is presided over by a threejudge panel . there are ninety four district courts spread geographically across the continental united states and outlying states and territories . all states fall under the geographic jurisdiction of at least one district court , with many states falling under the jurisdiction of multiple district courts . the federal district courts have general jurisdiction , and they hear both civil and criminal matters . like state trial courts , federal district courts determine the facts of a case and resolve the dispute . as in the state system , cases move up the federal court system through an appeals process . the intermediate federal courts are known as the united states circuit courts of appeal . fewer in number than the district courts , these thirteen circuit courts are similarly spread out across the united states . the thirteen circuit courts include eleven regional courts numbered one through eleven , the twelveth circuit for the district of columbia , and the federal circuit court . all of the circuit courts , except for the federal circuit court , have jurisdiction over the courts in their region ; the federal circuit court has nationwide jurisdiction , but it hears only certain types of cases . each circuit court has jurisdiction over a specified number of the ninety four district courts . for example , the united states court of appeals for the third circuit has appellate jurisdiction over all of the district courts in delaware , new jersey , pennsylvania , and the us virgin islands . as with the federal district courts , circuit court cases are presided over by a threejudge panel . at the top tier of the federal court system is the us supreme court . the us supreme court is the highest court in the country , and being a frequent topic of discussion , it is often abbreviated as ussc or scotus . as an appellate court , the supreme court only hears cases for which the justices have granted an appeal . unique to the supreme court is its composition of eight associate justices and one chief justice . there is , however , no basis in the constitution for setting the number of justices at nine . article iii of the us constitution authorizes congress to establish the number of supreme court justices , and the size of the supreme court has been changed a few times over the years . for example , the judiciary act of one thousand, seven hundred and eighty nine called for the appointment of six justices , but the supreme court was expanded to seven members in one thousand, eight hundred and seven , nine members in one thousand, eight hundred and thirty seven , and ten members in one thousand, eight hundred and sixty three. the judiciary act of one thousand, eight hundred and sixty nine set the number of justices at nine , and it has remained at this size since that time . each justice is appointed by the president , confirmed by the senate , and serves for life . typically , the supreme court is charged with interpreting the us constitution , meaning that it reviews whether lower court decisions comported or conflicted with constitutional rights and protections . however , the supreme court also addresses other matters relating to federal law . like most state high courts , the supreme court has discretionary jurisdiction . each year , thousands of cases are appealed to the us supreme court , but it hears only a small fraction of those cases . at least four of the nine justices must agree to hear a case , and at least five of the nine justices must agree on the outcome for there to be a majority opinion when deciding the case . the supreme court has jurisdiction over all cases decided by federal circuit courts and all cases from state courts that implicate the us constitution or federal law . as the highest court in the united states , all decisions of the us supreme court are final . as mentioned earlier , a criminal case that has made or is making its way up the steps of the state court system can potentially jump over to the federal court system ; the reverse situation that is , going from federal court to state court is not permissible in the american legal system . one common method of jumping from state court to federal court is through a writ of habeas corpus , which is an appeal to a federal district court to hear the case at hand . habeas corpus , roughly translated as you have the body , is technically a challenge to the legitimacy of a prisoner detainment . thus , the typical habeas petitioner is a prisoner who has been convicted of a crime . in practice , habeas corpus is an assertion that a prisoner federal constitutional rights were violated along the way toward his or her current detainment . once a case has jumped over the rail into the federal court system , the case remains in the federal system . thus , any appeals flowing from the federal district court findings must go through the federal appellate process . another way for a case to move from the state court system to the federal court system is by a writ of certiorari . if issued , a writ of certiorari provides that a case will be heard by the us supreme court . toward that end , a writ of certiorari can bring a case before the us supreme court after the case has been settled by either a federal court of appeals or a state high court . in contrast with habeas corpus , writs of certiorari must be filed within ninety days of a judgment being entered . thus , whereas a writ of habeas corpus may arise after conviction , sentencing , and lengthy detainment , a writ of certiorari requests review of a decision recently rendered . also , whereas a writ of habeas corpus is applicable only in criminal contexts , a writ of certiorari applies in either civil or criminal contexts . one common misunderstanding is that individuals file writs of certiorari to the supreme court requesting that the court hear a particular case . however , it is the supreme court that announces whether it will grant an appeal by issuing a writ of certiorari to the appellant . this makes sense given the meaning of writ of certiorari , which can be translated as to be more fully informed. recent statistics suggest that the supreme court receives roughly seven petitions for certiorari each year but typically only grants one percent to two percent of the petitions .having discussed the sources of law and how cases move through the different courts systems , it is important to understand the reach or influence of a court ruling . united states courts follow a system of stare decisis , short for the latin phrase stare decisis et non quieta movere , roughly translated to mean maintain what has been decided and do not alter that which has been established. in practice , when a judge faces an issue that has previously been addressed by a court , stare decisis dictates that the judge follow the previous court decision . that said , the judge is not strictly required to follow the previous court decision ; it is just an expectation . but the weight of that expectation can vary depending on which court previously addressed the issue at hand . therein lies the nature of binding authority versus persuasive authority . if the earlier ruling came from a higher court in the same jurisdiction , then a judge is bound to follow that court ruling . because the judge is bound , it is referred to as binding authority . for example , if the supreme court of california rules on an issue , the lower courts within california are expected to follow the state supreme court ruling . strictly speaking , the judge in a lower court is not mandated to follow the higher court ruling ; should the judge deviate , he or she will not be fined , removed , or otherwise penalized , although reelection may be more difficult if the issue is polarizing . but such a deviation would certainly provide grounds for appeal . by contrast , a court reviewing decisions from a lower court or a court in another jurisdiction is not bound by those decisions . in that context , how other courts have resolved a legal issue is viewed merely as persuasive authority ; the deciding court is not bound by those decisions , but it may be guided by those other decisions . attorneys arguing before the court may cite these other rulings and cases as examples of how they would like the court to rule , attempting to persuade the court to follow the lead set by other courts . thus , persuasive authority may help guide a court toward a decision , but there should be no expectation that the court will follow it . one final caveat relates to the nature of binding authority and the interplay between federal courts and state courts . all decisions by the us supreme court are binding on federal courts , but not all us supreme court decisions are binding on state courts . the determining factor is whether the legal issue implicates state courts or only federal courts . for example , if the us supreme court determines that execution is unconstitutional because it constitutes cruel and unusual punishment under the eighth amendment , then no states may execute offenders . however , if the supreme court decision is limited to federal courts for example , how the fre are to be interpreted then that decision does not affect state courts . state courts are free to adopt the supreme court position , but they are not required to do so . a variety of options are available for those interested in researching the law , and selecting from among the multitude of available resources and various approaches to conducting legal research certainly can be challenging for a mental health professional . although there are many research options available , forensic mental health professionals must be knowledgeable about which option is best suited for their particular needs . some options for researching the law are more formal and presume some degree of legal knowledge , whereas other options are quite informal and require no upfront legal knowledge ; some options for conducting legal research are expensive and perhaps cost prohibitive to some mental health professionals , whereas other options are free and available to anyone with an internet connection ; and some resources provide comprehensive coverage of federal and state case law , federal and state statutes , and secondary legal literature , whereas other resources primarily provide coverage of recent decisions from the us supreme court . in this section , we review the many options that are available for conducting legal research.perhaps the bestknown option for conducting legal research is commercially available electronic legal databases . the two undisputed leaders in this industry westlaw and lexisnexis are likely familiar to most readers , even those without formal legal training who have never conducted legal research . both of these electronic legal databases provide comprehensive coverage of primary and secondary legal materials , and numerous courts , law firms , attorneys , and other legal professionals throughout the united states and many other countries have a long history of relying on these databases . westlaw and lexisnexis are available only by paid subscription and therefore may not be available for those with limited economic resources , although many university libraries and some public libraries subscribe to these databases . both westlaw and lexisnexis have been providing commercially available legal research services since the early nineteen seventies . when these companies were first started , which was largely preinternet and certainly before the days of widespread personal computers , these services were available as dialup services via dedicated terminals . it was not until the late nineteen eighties that both companies began offering internetbased programs for use on personal computers , and that marked a watershed moment in legal research . westlaw and lexisnexis offer most of the same services , so choosing between the two is often a matter of personal preference , although the different subscription plans are also likely a factor . westlaw was started by west publishing , which has been headquartered in eagan , minnesota , since nineteen ninety two , and it was acquired by thomson corporation in nineteen ninety six . westlaw provides comprehensive coverage of state and federal case law , state and federal statutes , administrative regulations , and secondary legal resources . importantly , though , coverage of trial court decisions is largely limited to federal courts ; the state cases included in westlaw typically are limited to appellate decisions . westlaw has also been providing increasing coverage of international law , and a variety of westlaw services are currently available in nearly seventy countries worldwide . besides its comprehensive coverage of legal materials , westlaw has several features that make it user friendly . for example , west developed a proprietary classification system west key number system that provides a standardized taxonomy for all us legal materials . using this system , numerous points of law are organized by topic and key number , which makes it easier for users to identify materials that are relevant to their needs . westlaw offers several search features , including natural language and boolean , and it is possible to search , for example , through all state and federal cases or to limit a search to cases from one jurisdiction . another notable feature of westlaw is keycite , which is a citation checking service that allows users to determine whether cases and statutes are still good law . as mentioned , westlaw primary competitor is lexisnexis . lexisnexis has undergone several name changes since the early nineteen seventies , and it is currently headquartered in dayton , ohio . like westlaw , lexisnexis provides comprehensive coverage of state and federal case law , state and federal statutes , administrative regulations , and secondary legal resources . as with westlaw , there is limited coverage of trial court opinions at the state level . lexisnexis provides extensive coverage of published us cases dating back to the late one thousand, seven hundreds , and it also provides wideranging coverage of other primary and secondary legal resources . the nexis aspect of lexisnexis is dedicated to providing access to content from thousands of global news sources , public records , legislative and regulatory filings , and many other types of legal materials . like westlaw , lexisnexis offers a variety of services and features that enhance its usability and popularity , including services that allow those conducting legal research to determine if a particular law is still good law . westlaw and lexisnexis have set the standard when it comes to electronic legal databases , but the services they provide can be costly . both companies offer a variety of subscription plans tailored to consumer needs ; for example , a small law firm that restricts its business to one state does not have the same needs for electronic legal databases as a large law firm that has offices in several states or even several countries . some of the available pricing plans are flat rate , which means that users have unlimited access to the service for a set time , while other pricing plans are based on the number of transactions conducted . the range for these pricing plans is quite large . some services may be available for a few dollars , while other services can cost thousands of dollars in a given billing period . not too long ago , commercial databases such as lexisnexis and westlaw were the only options available for conducting legal research . fortunately for those who find westlaw and lexisnexis to be cost prohibitive or unavailable , several electronic databases that are considerably less costly sometimes even free have been developed in recent years . a few examples are presented here . thelaw provides coverage of all federal cases , all federal bankruptcy cases , and most state court cases from nineteen fifty ; all state and federal statutes and regulations ; judicial and administrative rules and forms ; and several other legal resources . as of this writing , annual subscriptions range from five hundred and seventy five for unlimited use by one lawyer and one paralegal to one for unlimited use by five lawyers and five paralegals . another affordable electronic legal database is nationallawlibrary . the federal law collection includes coverage of case law from the us supreme court and all federal circuit courts and coverage of federal rules , and the state law collection provides fifty years of case law coverage . nationallawlibrary offers a wide variety of subscription plans , including a federal plan , a single state plan , an all states plus federal plan , and a plan that charges by the transaction . versuslaw provides coverage of all federal court cases , all state appellate court cases , state and federal statutes , and some additional legal resources . subscription plans for versuslaw range from a standard plan for thirteen , to a professional plan for thirty nine . there are also several free electronic resources that provide a wealth of legally relevant information . for example , findlaw is a popular option that contains state and federal case law and state and federal statutes , and it also offers access to recent legal news , an attorney directory , education about various legal topics , and a free legal magazine . cornell university legal information institute is a useful resource for mental health professionals interested in conducting legal research . it offers access to numerous legal resources , such as the us constitution , state and federal statutes , and us supreme court decisions . it also includes userfriendly resources , such as a legal dictionary and encyclopedia , to facilitate interpretation and comprehension of various laws . many law schools and law libraries maintain web sites that provide useful information for laypeople interested in conducting legal research . for example , the law library of congress has a number of helpful tutorials and direct links to primary and secondary sources of law . the southern illinois university school of law library maintains a useful web site , with a variety of free and helpful tips , articles , and blogs on conducting research . the georgetown law library maintains a similar web site that includes selfguided tutorials for learning about legal research . finally , google scholar , which has offered a legal opinions and journals database since two thousand and nine , exemplifies recent improvements in public accessibility to legal resources . to reduce costs associated with using subscriptionbased commercial databases , one option is to begin researching a legal issue on google scholar and then move to a commercial database once the research has been sufficiently narrowed.although formal legal research using primary sources of law and commercial electronic legal databases , such as westlaw and lexisnexis , provide accurate and detailed information relevant to forensic mental health professionals , these options can be costly and difficult to access for some mental health practitioners . fortunately , there are a variety of less formal approaches to conducting legal research . these informal approaches are often as helpful as formal approaches and may be more desirable and practical for forensic clinicians in many situations . for example , forensic mental health professionals may benefit from utilizing libraries and various print materials and from networking and consulting with other professionals and organizations within the forensic psychology and legal fields . although the internet provides an abundance of information about various legal topics and sources of law , print sources are a viable alternative to electronic sources of legal material . these print sources are available in law school libraries and occasionally even public libraries , and many law schools permit visitors to use their library at certain times . legal digests , which are series of books that provide brief overviews of the points of law contained in important cases , often serve as a particularly useful starting point when conducting an informal legal search . digests are organized alphabetically by subject , which generally benefits the forensic practitioner interested in researching a circumscribed number of specific legal issues , and they are available in versions that include state , federal , and us supreme court cases . legal encyclopedias are similarly beneficial in providing an introduction to a particular area of law . legal encyclopedias are accessible and user friendly , and they provide citations to primary sources of law . the two primary legal encyclopedias , american jurisprudence and corpus juris secundum , are excellent resources for both novice and experienced forensic mental health professionals , which is one of the most frequently referenced legal encyclopedias , is relatively selective in its coverage of topics , which enhances its readability . cjs is more exhaustive , containing lengthier and more detailed entries than those found in . the legal treatises and hornbooks discussed previously are also useful sources of secondary legal authority . finally , a number of books have been written over the past few decades specifically targeted at mental health professionals interested in fmhas . the law and mental health professionals series , published by the apa , provides a comprehensive overview of statespecific information about many legal topics relevant to forensic practice . a more recent contribution to the forensic literature is the multivolume best practices for forensic mental health assessments series published by oxford university press . the oxford series includes books dedicated to specific forensic topics , such as violence risk assessment , competence to stand trial , civil commitment , and personal injury , and each book covers the legal standards applicable to the type of assessment it is covering . numerous other books written for and by forensic mental health professionals are available as useful sources of legal information . some of these books focus on specific types of fmhas , and others focus more broadly on the process of conducting fmhas . legal periodicals and other scholarly journals may also assist the forensic mental health professional in acquiring valuable legal information that will facilitate his or her understanding of relevant law . although many legal periodicals emphasize legal topics that are not directly relevant to fmhas , other publications specialize in psycholegal topics that are likely to be particularly useful to clinicians who conduct fmhas . law reviews are a valuable type of legal periodical . the university of alabama law and psychology review is one such journal likely to assist forensic clinicians interested in gleaning information about applicable law . another relevant law review is the mental health law and policy journal , published by the cecil humphreys school of law at the university of memphis . in addition to law reviews , other types of legal periodicals may be useful . the journal of psychiatry and law and the american journal of law and medicine are peerreviewed journals that include articles with clear relevance to forensic practice . a number of other scholarly peerreviewed journals focus on interdisciplinary topics related to psychology and law . psychology , public policy , and law , which is a hybrid lawโpsychology journal , and law and human behavior are two examples of journals published by the apa that provide legal information relevant to forensic clinicians . articles published in such nonlegal periodicals typically are not written using highly technical language and are therefore more likely to be comprehensible to forensic mental health professionals who do not have formal legal training . although the printed legal resources just discussed are available for purchase , many of them are also accessible for free at local libraries and university libraries . forensic mental health professionals are encouraged to obtain particularly helpful legal digests , treatises , or other legal resources to have on hand as convenient references . however , the advantages of utilizing public , university , and law libraries should not be overlooked . law libraries provide comprehensive and varied source of legal resources , and occasionally they permit visitors to access their collections . moreover , law librarians can be a valuable resource in guiding a forensic clinician through the legal research process and suggesting relevant legal materials . forensic mental health professionals who do not reside near law libraries may nevertheless benefit from visiting public , university , or courthouse libraries . although these libraries generally do not house as many legal resources as law libraries , they typically contain sufficiently large legal collections to be of use to forensic clinicians interested in conducting legal research . mental health professionals interested in increasing their legal knowledge will certainly benefit from consulting print and electronic legal resources , but the value of seeking information and consultation from professional organizations and knowledgeable colleagues can not be overstated . organizations such as the apls often provide opportunities to practitioners interested in augmenting their legal knowledge . apls , for example , hosts workshops and an annual conference , offers a network of knowledgeable scholars and forensic clinicians , and provides a number of useful resources online . the apls web site provides links to more than a dozen external sources related to law and mental health . these external sites supply valuable information on topics such as mental health law decisions from the us circuit courts of appeal , landmark cases , and important legal updates germane to forensic mental health professionals . similarly , the ali , which is selfdescribed as an organization dedicated to clarifying , modernizing , and improving the law , is another optimal resource for forensic clinicians . mental health practitioners conducting fmhas can obtain a wealth of legal knowledge by consulting resources on the ali web site or contacting the organization directly . finally , there are a variety of continuing education workshops that offer legally relevant information for forensic mental health professionals . for example , the american academy of forensic psychology , which is the training and education affiliate of the american board of forensic psychology , sponsors a variety of ce workshops that focus at least in part on legal issues relevant to forensic practice . in addition to networking and taking advantage of training opportunities through professional organizations , forensic mental health professionals interested in enhancing their legal knowledge can seek counsel from knowledgeable and experienced colleagues . referring attorneys are an obvious legal resource , and forensic mental health professionals can gain guidance on relevant law from the referring attorney . experienced forensic mental health practitioners , other attorneys , and other legal professionals can also serve as valuable resources for clinicians interested in enhancing their legal knowledge . consulting with experienced colleagues about relevant law , applicable psycholegal standards , proper assessment techniques , and other matters relevant to fmhas is highly recommended and should be considered a best practice.at this point , we hope we have made clear the importance of knowing the law , the structure of the law , and how to find the law . after finding the law , the next step is knowing what to do with it , which is often not as straightforward as it might appear . reading and interpreting exactly what is being said by a court or legislature in a case or statute can be challenging . in fact , a common criticism levied against attorneys , judges , and lawmakers is that they make the law inaccessible to the lay individual . one such method of keeping the law at arm reach or hiding the ball a bit of law school jargon is by the way they write the judicial decisions and statutes . although a growing movement of lawyers advocate for plain english drafting , many persist with tradition , and of course all settled law and cases remain written in traditional style . it is not uncommon for new students of the law , after first reading through a case , to be left with no idea of what they have just read . a statute may read like a list , within a larger list , containing its own sublists ; a judicial opinion might read like one long runon sentence in outdated prose or olde english . making sense of it all can prove to be a daunting task , even for those with formal legal training . however , as with other topics discussed in this chapter , there is a steep learning curve , enhanced by knowing a few tips and tricks about how to digest legal literature . the topic is large enough to fill an entire chapter or book by itself and has done so many times over . that level of detail can not be matched in this brief section , but we can offer a few tips and guidelines . statutes typically are organized in hierarchical fashion . thus , someone interested in a particular statute may have to look at the criminal code , divided into articles , each of which has chapters , with subsections , and so forth . once the statute being sought is identified , the first step is to read it to confirm that it is the correct statute . even if some of the statutory details are skipped over , a quick read of the statute should , it is hoped , confirm that it is indeed the correct statute that was being sought . after confirming it is the correct statute , a few rules of interpretation are worth following . the first section of many statutes defines key terms that are used later in the statute , and being familiar with these definitions provides a context for interpreting the statute . look for whether the elements in the statute are conjunctive or disjunctive ; whether a legal disposition rests on several elements being met versus one of several elements can affect the interpretation of a statute . similarly , look for key terms like may and shall. although it is tempting to read them over quickly , these are examples of legalese that confer specific requirements . an individual who shall do something violates the statute if he or she fails to do so . toward that end , resist the temptation to infer a word or phrase meaning based on context . although harmless while reading a novel , misinterpreting a legal term can alter the statute meaning . it might be a good idea to have a copy of a legal dictionary handy while reading the statute , just in case such a situation arises . last , it is common for statutes to reference other statutes , and only by reading those other statutes is it possible to get a full picture of the statute at hand . unlike statutes , cases do not fit so neatly into a hierarchical format . whereas statutes typically are published or revised holistically , such that everything fits together nicely , precedential cases are decided only as novel legal issues come before a court . thus , it becomes the responsibility of the researcher to determine how a case or cases fit into the overall area of law . this synthesis of case law is one of the most challenging aspects of legal research for the novice and experienced researcher alike . however , convention dictates that cases are typically organized in a similar fashion , or that they at least contain certain elements . knowing what to look for is an effective way to sift through a lengthy legal decision and take away only the most important information . the text of major cases can be divided into five categories : facts , procedural history , issue , legal reasoning , and holding ; a possible sixth category is legal precedent , but this category can be subsumed under legal reasoning . the five categories also tend to appear in this order , although there may be a summary of information provided by westlaw or lexisnexis . the facts of the case vary in length but are typically as brief as possible while still conveying all necessary information to provide the relevant context . the procedural history consists of the legal history of the case since its inception , including the holding by the court of original instance , appeals filed , appeals granted , and the like . although information about such things as pretrial motions , testimony , and evidence may straddle the line between facts and procedural history , in practice the distinction is often insignificant . it is the combined facts and procedural history that can help inform readers about whether the case is relevant to their needs . stated another way , the facts tell whether two cases are alike or different in key elements , and the procedural history determines whether the case is binding or persuasive authority in a given jurisdiction . the facts and procedural history contextualize a case . however , the issue , the legal reasoning , and the holding are what make each case unique and what the legal researcher is ultimately looking for when reading a case . the issue is a shorthand name for the legal question the court is answering in its review . sometimes the judicial opinion will clearly state the issue . in other instances , the court may talk about the case turning or hinging on , for example , whether the court decides to interpret the law in one way or another . by the end of a case , the court has answered the legal issue in its holding . the explanation connecting the issue to the holding is the court reasoning . depending on whether the researcher is looking at the case as potentially binding or persuasive authority , emphasis may be placed more on the holding or the reasoning . in the case of binding authority , the holding is the most important component of the case . although even when looking for binding authority , the legal reasoning by which the court arrived at its holding should not be overlooked . to do so could risk misunderstanding or misusing the case or being caught off guard by citing a case that is not fully understood . when relying on a case as persuasive authority , the legal reasoning is as important as the holding . after all , if someone is trying to convince the court to adopt a certain line of reasoning , understanding how the court in a cited case applied its own legal reasoning is a necessary precursor.an important step in doing legal research is determining if the law is good law. an authority that is good law carries legal weight and can be safely relied on . confirming that something is good law can happen at the front end of research by making sure the research is properly executed , or it can happen at the back end by making sure the law being relied on is still valid authority . in practice , individuals who are savvy at conducting legal research check the status of law on a rolling process throughout the research process , making sure that any time spent reading the legal literature is well invested . we suggest this approach , although we recommend at the very least that the validity check happen as a final step before submitting a report or appearing in court . an attorney or forensic mental health practitioner relying on outdated or bad law may be committing procedural errors , making mistakes in practice , or making faulty assumptions . although it is somewhat tautological to say as much , a legal authority is good law unless it has otherwise been made bad law . what is important to note is that a legal researcher need not in fact , may be unable to find history supporting or confirming that something is in fact good law . the important point here is that something is good law unless something is found to the contrary . thus , a case published very recently is likely to be good law , if for no other reason than there has not been time for it to be reversed , overruled , updated , or repealed . on a related note , a decision being old should not automatically raise the inference that it is bad law . plenty of law remains settled for decades . rather , an older decision or statute just means there is more time for potential history that needs review.the process of determining whether a law is good law has been described by many different names , including citechecking , verifying , confirming , and updating . however , westlaw and lexisnexis have two proprietary terms for determining whether something is good law : keyciting and shepardizing . the term shepardizing refers to using shepard citations , which was the first system by which cases and their subsequent history were tracked . shepard citations provides all subsequent authority that cite a legal authority and also whether any court has overruled the original opinion , which would make it bad law . for purposes of this chapter , it is important to emphasize that westlaw and lexisnexis provide all relevant procedural history at the click of a mouse , for any case , statute , or regulation . it should be obvious at that point whether the authority is still good law , but both westlaw and lexis provide tutorials and round the clock customer support if there are still questions about whether it is good law . although some university and public libraries offer access to westlaw and lexisnexis , these services may be unavailable to many people . as such , it is worth discussing how to determine whether something is good law without the aid of westlaw or lexisnexis . earlier in the chapter , we discussed three types of law : statutory law , case law , and constitutional law . constitutional law does not change unless a constitution is amended , which is a fairly rare occurrence , so determining whether you have good law is most relevant when it comes to statutory law and case law . with respect to statutes , a statute is good law unless it has been repealed or superseded by a new statute or declared unconstitutional by the court . a classic example of a statute being declared unconstitutional is the us supreme court decision in dred scott sandford , in which the supreme court declared a recent act of congress to be unconstitutional . in this regrettable decision , the supreme court concluded that african americans brought into the united states and held as slaves were not , in fact , citizens of the united states and therefore not entitled to protection under the us constitution . to determine whether a statute has been repealed or superseded by a newer statute , a good starting point is determining when the statutory code was most recently updated . then it is important to check which statutes have been updated or enacted since that update . this information is located in what is called the pocket part of the code . essentially , because statutes change regularly and reprinting codes is expensive , many legal references are purchased as part of a subscription . as part of this subscription , the publisher sends out updates at regular intervals , usually either quarterly or annually . these updates come printed in a small booklet , cut to fit the size of the legal code , and the booklets conveniently fit within the back of the originally printed hardback code . hence , the pocket part of the statute is located in the back of the book , and it includes all of the updates since the code was last bound . pocket parts should also include citations to any cases that have interpreted the statute . by reading those cases it is possible to determine whether any major court cases have addressed the statute . as with statutory law , case law can become bad law when a new statute supersedes the case law or a new case replaces the old legal rule . however , evaluating whether a case is still good law is a bit more complicated than for a statute . as such , it is necessary to discuss some new terminology . a case is not good law if it has been reversed or overruled or if the statute on which it was based has been updated . the term reversed means that a higher court reviewed the specific case and disagreed with the lower court , reversing the lower court decision . overruled means that another case occurred at a later date but involved the same legal issue , and the court decided the issue differently than it had previously . a classic example is the brown board of education desegregation decision , which overturned the separate but equal doctrine upheld in plessy fergusson . the terms reversed and overruled sometimes are used interchangeably , but a good way to think of it is that holdings get reversed and legal rules get overruled . to determine whether a case is still good law , start by checking the case procedural history , which should be included at the end of the case . the case procedural history would show whether the case was appealed and whether that appeal was granted , and , if so , whether a higher court upheld or reversed the lower court decision . as another general rule , it is common to cite to the highest authority that heard a case . for example , if the results of legal research yield a trial court case but later research reveals that the case was ultimately reviewed by the us supreme court , in almost all situations the supreme court case would be cited . this illustrates that checking the validity of a case is useful not just to make sure something is good legal authority but also to make sure that the highest legal authority for a given legal issue has been identified . after investigating a case procedural history , it is necessary to determine whether any statutes have been enacted that have changed the case from good law to bad law . this is a bit more arduous but basically involves reading the case and looking for any statutes the court references in the opinion . if the court does cite one or more statutes , then it must be determined whether that statute was related to a legal issue in the case . if the statute was related to a legal issue in the case or if the case turned on how the court interpreted the statute , it is necessary to see whether that statute has been updated . if the statute has been updated , it becomes necessary to interpret the change in light of the case , synthesizing the literature that has been amassed . only at that point is it possible to determine whether the case is good law or has been overruled by the statute . one complication has to do with the degree to which someone is relying on a given legal authority . as discussed earlier , some authority is binding , and other authority is persuasive . whether an authority is good law or bad law partially depends on whether it is being relied upon as binding authority or persuasive authority . thus , if a court higher than the one that decided a particular case has reversed or overruled the decision , then the case at hand is bad law . if , however , a court in another jurisdiction has simply declined to adopt the approach taken by the case at hand , then the case is still good law , although there is now persuasive authority against the case . most challenging is when one or more courts in the same jurisdiction and at the same level have treated a case differently . although courts are free to reach different decisions , there is some pressure and expectation for different courts on the same level to adhere to stare decisis and rule similarly . a judge wishing to do otherwise might try to distinguish the facts of the case at hand so the argument can be made that he or she is not answering the same legal question differently but rather answering a related but slightly different question.having found , digested , and ascertained the validity of the relevant statutes and cases , the final step involves synthesizing the authorities . synthesizing may sound easy at first ; after all , is it not simply putting together all of the information into a list of holdings ? sometimes synthesis is this simple , and by bringing together all of the relevant holdings and statutes on a legal issue , it is possible to infer the legal rules the courts will likely follow when addressing a given legal issue . however , it is not unusual to find multiple authorities that may seem to contradict one another . based on the previous discussion about determining whether something is good law , the obvious answer in such a situation would be that something is bad law . but what if nothing has been overruled , superseded , or revised ? in such a situation , a series of questions may alleviate the confusion . first , are the cases and statutes in the same jurisdiction ? second , is everything still good law ? if the answer to both of those questions is yes , then the most likely explanation is that there is some minor distinction between the cases or statutes . stated another way , the cases are not , in fact , addressing the same legal issue . after all , very similar legal issues can be answered in entirely different ways . at the time of this writing , for example , the us supreme court has concluded that the death penalty does not violate the eighth amendment , unless of course the defendant is intellectually disabled or was under the age of eighteen at the time of the offense . this illustrates how what may have looked like one legal issue is in fact three separate issues . thus , synthesizing can sometimes feel more like reconciling , but the importance of this step can not be overstated . after all , if all of the research is not correctly synthesized , resulting in some mistake of law , much of the research process will have been for naught.understanding how to access , find , interpret , and synthesize the law is a widereaching topic that can fill many volumes . the existence of countless books and legal resources devoted entirely to the subject of legal research attests to the complexity and breadth of material that we could have covered in this chapter . in this chapter , we have provided a broad outline designed to help forensic mental health professionals become more comfortable and efficient in conducting legal research , which we believe will enhance the quality of their forensic work . 