assessing criminal responsibility . much has been written about criminal responsibility and issues of insanity or mental state at the time of the offense . in this chapter , we focus on three major areas : a review of issues related to the assessment of criminal responsibility , including the structure of these evaluations , instruments developed to guide evaluators , the role of psychotic symptoms , particularly delusions , in the evaluation of criminal responsibility , and issues pertaining to the treatment and release of insanity acquittees . an overview of the empirical developments regarding criminal responsibility , including research on not guilty by reason of insanity verdicts , judicial instruction , and jury decision making . as it is impossible to provide a comprehensive review in one chapter , the interested reader is also referred to additional resources for an indepth understanding of this topic area . insanity standards and the construal of criminal responsibility . the complexity of arguments , philosophical debates , opinions , and data on the insanity defense can not be approached without a personal decision to accept or reject a rather simple thesis . belief in this basic thesis is not subject to scientific argument ; rather , it is morally axiomatic . that is , one either accepts it as a function of one fundamental moral , religious , and jurisprudential presuppositions , or one does not . given the nonprovable nature of this moral thesis , scientific and logical arguments about aspects of the insanity defense and the assessment of mental state are possible , but acceptance or rejection of the argument is not a matter of proof or science . this fundamental belief may be stated in this way : in cognizing and regulating social interactions in terms of fundamental principles of fairness and justice , we assume that all such social interactions , including the societal judgment of criminal or civil responsibility for certain classes of proscribed behavior , are based upon an ethical calculus that assigns individual blame , culpability , liability , punishability , and moral and criminal responsibility as a function of intentionality and mental capacity . the classical formulation of this moral presupposition is the legal maxim actus non facit reum , nisi mens sit rea , which translates freely into modern english as an act is not legally cognizable as evil , and hence criminally punishable , unless it is committed by a person who has the capacity to cognize the act as evil and then freely chooses to do it . this fundamental belief goes to the heart of the tension in the public mind , as well as in criminal and civil law , between strict or objective liability , on one hand , and subjective liability , on the other . an examination of the history of the criminal law in western judeochristian cultures clearly demonstrates the nature of this tension . the dilemma is simply this : on one hand , it is clear that , when someone performs a heinous or reprehensible act , he or she is guilty in the common sense meaning of that term . on the other hand , to have a theory of action and responsibility that embodies our cultural sense of fairness and justice , one that reflects our increasing knowledge of psychological processes , in general , and psychotic processes , in particular , we have to consider the conjunction of the proscribed behavior and an appropriate degree and type of intentionality and mental capacity in ascribing guilty or culpable ownership of an act . we will not attempt to address the moral question about the insanity defense whether it should exist or not . our belief , along with many scholars who have examined this issue , is that its existence is integral to the fabric of our social structure , which includes , but is not limited to , the structure of our criminal law . rather , we outline issues relevant to mental health professionals who are called on to evaluate defendants and offer expert opinions on the issue of criminal responsibility . concept of mens rea . it is well established within the historical and jurisprudential literatures that the fundamental concept of mens rea within judeochristian cultures has been in existence since the earliest recordings of hebrew law . platt and diamond , for example , quoted the babylonian talmud as observing that deafmute , an idiot and a minor are awkward to deal with , as he who injures them is liable , whereas if they injure others they are exempt . this concept may be traced , in a continuous line of development , through greek and roman law wherein the concept of culpa is distinguished from dolus . children under the age of seven , for example , were considered doli incapax , that is , not possessed of sufficient discretion and intelligence to distinguish between right and wrong and hence incapable of criminal intention or malice . children ages seven to twelve were presumed doli incapax unless evidence of capacity to form culpable intention was presented . interestingly , the pattern of evidence most frequently adduced to infer such intentionality , such as lying about the crime , concealing the body , or other such after the fact actions , is still used in modern insanity trials as evidence that the person was capable of the prerequisite intentionality at the time of the crime . the culmination of this doctrine in more modern jurisprudence is presented in blackstone commentaries in its classic form : all the several pleas and excuses , which protect the committer of a forbidden act from the punishment which is otherwise annexed thereto , may be reduced to this single consideration , the want or defect of will . an involuntary act , as it has no claim to merit , so neither can it induce any guilt : the concurrence of the will , when it has its choice either to do or to avoid the fact in question , being the only thing that renders human actions either praiseworthy or culpable . indeed , to make a complete crime , cognizable by human laws , there must be both a will and an act . for the rule of law as to . is that furiosus furore solum punitur . in criminal cases therefore idiots and lunatics are not chargeable for their own acts , if committed when under these incapacities : no , not even for treason itself . one can show that the entire structure of the criminal law is built on this principle . sayre observed that , whereas one of the earliest legal texts , leges henrici primi , alternated between advocating absolute liability he who commits evil unknowingly must pay for it knowingly and advocating the principle of mens rea , it was standard practice for the king to either pardon mentally disordered persons found guilty of absolute liability crimes or for other financial arrangements to be made . in fact , in sayre classic review of mens rea , it was argued that the tradition of criminal law in england dating back to henry i originated in theological opposition to secular laws of absolute responsibility . this theological opposition was based on a belief that god could not properly hold an infant , idiot , or lunatic justly responsible . it is interesting to note that the age at which children generally are assumed to be criminally responsible corresponds to the age within all major religions at which they usually pass through a certification ritual where they are deemed morally responsible in the eyes of god . platt and diamond showed in their historical reviews that the furiously insane have been exempted from moral sanction by an extension of the same logic . whereas mens rea has been historically interpreted in a broad fashion , making it roughly synonymous with culpable intentionality or with the general mental and emotional capacity prerequisite to choose freely to commit proscribed acts , the modern trend in criminal law has been to interpret the mens rea requirement of criminal conduct more narrowly and equate it with such phrases as proscribed conduct performed intentionally , recklessly , knowingly , or purposefully . discomfort with the insanity defense sometimes has resulted in attempts to either abolish it outright or to change it drastically by restricting the relevance of mental state to such a narrowly defined mens rea . the most comprehensive scholarly review of this narrowing approach was conducted by wales , who discussed the problem using the well known metaphor of squeezing a lemon . in other words , the prototypic case envisioned as qualifying for exculpation under the narrow view would be delusional mistake of fact . in discussing the legislative history of narrowing attempts , wales made it clear that the underlying motivation is to eliminate the insanity defense without raising constitutional considerations and to ensure that more insanity like acquittees are first found guilty and then found to be in need of treatment or mentally ill . wales argued that the cases most likely to be acted on differently are those involving command hallucinations , delusions , and paranoid processes , where it is clear that the defendant acted knowingly in the narrow sense of the term , but that the knowingness was dependent on delusional , hallucinatory , or otherwise psychotic belief systems . beginning with the first nixon administration , there have been many attempts by federal and state legislatures to accomplish this shift in the focus of the insanity defense . in addition to the narrowing of the concept of mens rea , some states have experimented with giving decision makers an in between verdict , namely guilty but mentally ill , which , in reality , is simply a guilty verdict made without the guarantee of differences in sentencing , disposition , or mental health treatment . finally , some states continue to experiment with varying levels of abolition . in two thousand and four , idaho effectively abolished an insanity defense through statutes providing that mental condition shall not be a defense to any charge of criminal conduct . a writ of certiorari was recently denied in delling idaho , thus leaving unanswered the question of whether the us constitution permits a state to abolish the insanity defense in criminal cases . currently , the modal insanity defense criteria in those forty six states that recognize some version of the insanity defense involve either assessing criminal responsibility three hundred and nineteen the traditional american law institute formulation or restricted versions of the traditional naghten test . evolution of legal standards for criminal responsibility . naghten trial is assumed to be the starting place for the test that : to establish a defense on the ground of insanity , it must be clearly proved that , at the time of the committing of the act , the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason , from disease of the mind , as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing ; or , if he did know it , that he did not know he was doing what was wrong . however , it is reasonably clear that the knowledge test had already been used implicitly and explicitly in a series of trials in both england and the united states . in fact , there was already considerable discomfort with the perceived narrow scope of the rule . isaac ray had already published his treatise on the medical jurisprudence of insanity in which he attacked the narrowness of such formulations as not according with modern knowledge of the forms of mental disorder and their influence on behavior , affect , and cognition . the same debates that occur today over the scope of what should be included under knowledge , appreciation , and the like were influential in court decisions of the day . although the naghten rules were rapidly adopted in the united states , they were almost immediately subjected to challenge on the narrowness ground and were modified significantly by some jurisdictions . in eighteen forty four , chief justice shaw of the massachusetts supreme court held that , although the right wrong test was proper , a defendant who acted under the influence of an irresistible impulse was not a free agent and , hence , was included under the rule , because he or she could not know right from wrong . in eighteen sixty six , justice somerville made this logic explicit in the ruling set forth in parsons state : if therefore , it be true , as a matter of fact , that the disease of insanity can . so affect the mind as to subvert the freedom of the will , and thereby destroy the power of the victim to choose between right and wrong , although he perceived it by which we mean the power of volition to adhere in action to the right and abstain from wrong is such a one criminally responsible for an act done under the influence of such a controlling disease ? we clearly think not . in nineteen twenty four , crotty documented that the jurisdictions in the united states were fragmented into four sets of rules : relatively pure naghten standard ; the naghten standard broadened by interpretation to include irresistible impulse as meeting the test ; the naghten standard supplemented by explicit irresistible impulse rules ; and the new hampshire product rule , heavily influenced by isaac ray and set forth in state pike . justice doe , in setting forth new hampshire product test , argued that it was a matter of legal fact , to be decided by a judge or jury , whether a defendant suffered from a disease of the mind and whether the proscribed behavior was a product of that disease . as such , he discarded formal rules of specific states of mind and asserted that it was up to the trier of fact to decide if was the offspring or product of mental disease in the defendant , he was not guilty by reason of insanity . in fact , for a long period of time following naghten , there was considerable controversy over insanity rules that surfaced repeatedly . charles guiteau assassination of president garfield in eighteen eighty one gave rise to a highly controversial trial and execution that took place against the background of a strong concern over irresistible impulses and a belief that insanity , especially moral insanity , was all too easy to feign . rosenberg scholarly analysis drew out these issues in fine detail , documenting public , legislative , and psychiatric reactions that are reminiscent of the current debate . judge cox highly elaborate instructions to the jury in guiteau trial left little doubt that the central issue before the jury concerned whether the alleged moral insanity and irresistible impulse fit into a straightforward interpretation of the right or wrong test outlined in naghten . whatever the jury may have thought of the battle of the experts and the problems of the insanity defense , however , guiteau placed himself in fatal jeopardy when he exhibited his uncontested egocentrism and interrupted the prosecutor toward the close of the trial by saying that is not the issue . the issue is , was my free agency destroyed ? i was overpowered . that is what the jury is to pass on . his rational comments may have prompted the jury to focus on his current mental state , a problem often confronted by defendants offering an insanity defense . controversy surrounding various definitional and procedural aspects of the insanity defense continued over the first half of the twentieth century . in nineteen fifty four , judge bazelon of the district of columbia court of appeals attempted to correct numerous deficiencies in the combined right or wrong impulse test in durham united states , combined irresistible impulse test in durham united states , wherein the proposed standard was that an accused be considered not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was the product of mental disease or defect . in united states brawner , which ended the dc court of appeal experiments with the durham product test and adopted the model penal code recommendations of the american law institute , judge leventhal carefully reviewed the court logic in adopting durham . first , fruitful , accurate and considered reflection of the sensibilities of the community as revised and expanded in the light of continued study of abnormal human behavior . second , the older test forced expert witnesses to testify in uncomfortably narrow terms of right or wrong , making it impossible to convey to the judge and jury the full range of information material to an assessment of defendant responsibility . although it has been asserted that the test need not be narrowly cognitive and could include a wider range of affective knowledge and appreciation if interpreted in the context of a proper jurisprudential and historical perspective , the concern of the durham court was that this was not typical practice and , therefore , needed to be corrected . although the durham product test was intended to remedy these problems , it was not perceived as having its intended effect and seemed instead to lead to the undue dominance of experts testifying in conclusory terms . as a result , the majority in brawner adopted the ali rule and further encouraged judges to adopt instructions that emphasized the importance of nonconclusory testimony and the expert role as explaining to the jury the relationship between the defendant cognitive , behavioral , and affective functioning and his or her substantial capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law . judge bazelon , in his partial dissent , agreed that the product test needed to be rejected , but he was more pessimistic , viewing the majority adoption of the ali rule as a change that was primarily one of form rather than of substance . for judge bazelon , the purpose of the reformulation should have been to ask the psychiatrist a single question : what is the nature of the impairment of the defendant mental and emotional processes and behavioral controls ? leaving for the jury the question of whether that impairment is sufficient to relieve the defendant of responsibility for the particular act charged . to emphasize this , judge bazelon advocated a version of a test first proposed by the british royal commission on capital punishment in nineteen fifty three : a defendant is not responsible if at the time of his unlawful conduct his mental or emotional processes or behavior controls were impaired to such an extent that he can not justly be held responsible for his act . judge bazelon argued that this justly responsible test has the virtue of making overt the underlying moral nature of the insanity defense and placing the hot potato aspect of such judgments squarely into the hands of the jury , as representatives of the community . the ali test in its full form has been adopted only by a few states hawaii , kentucky , massachusetts , rhode island , and wisconsin although a number of other states arkansas , connecticut , maryland , michigan , oregon , vermont , west virginia , and wyoming have adopted a modified version of the ali standard . although the full or modified ali rule has been widely adopted in federal jurisdictions and many states , the movement to reform the insanity defense and limit its perceived abuse has led to an attempt to eliminate the volitional prong of the test . advocates of this alteration have included the american bar association and the american psychiatric association ; this proposed alteration was adopted into the federal code by the united states congress in the insanity defense reform act . the court of appeals for the fifth circuit has agreed with this abolition of the volitional prong , arguing that the position of the american psychiatric association , that the profession did not possess sufficiently accurate scientific bases to measure a person capacity for selfcontrol , was persuasive . in a strongly worded dissent , it was argued that the potential threat to society created by the volitional prong ignored empirical data that . provide little or no support for these fearsome perceptions and in many respects refute them . the dissenting argument cited various studies undercutting the perceptions of the misuse of the insanity defense . the dissenters also could have included rogers , bloom , and manson finding that personality disordered defendants , the target of the advocates of abolishing the volitional prong , constituted only eighteen percent of a group of successful insanity acquittees . citing united states torniero , where the second circuit placed appropriate limits on creative uses of the volitional prong for new personality disorders by requiring the defense to show that respected authorities in the field share the view that the disorder is a disease or defect that could have impaired the defendant ability to desist from the offense charged , the dissenters argued that the volitional prong was an essential aspect of the concept of guilt , because this concept presuppose a morally responsible agent to whom guilt can be attributed . by definition , guilt can not be attributed to an individual unable to refrain from violating the law . delaware , illinois , indiana , and maine have adopted the ali cognitive prong only , and new york and the us federal system utilize the cognitive prong only , but as a variant of both the naghten and ali standards . the guilty but mentally ill verdict . as of two thousand , twenty states had provisions that allow for a defendant to be found gbmi , and utah uses the terminology guilty and mentally ill . the original gbmi legislation employed in the twentieth century was introduced in michigan in nineteen seventy five in the context of people mcquillan , a case that found michigan automatic commitment of ngri acquittee unconstitutional . the verdict was also adopted in indiana in nineteen seventy nine under similar circumstances . following hinckley attempted assassination of president reagan , the stage was set for other states to pass gbmi legislation in response to the perceived abuses of the insanity defense . the current gbmi defense was not intended to replace the ngri defense . whereas both verdicts were introduced to stem the perceived tide of violence committed by offenders who escape justice , the current form was aimed primarily at jurors , with the hope that it would provide them with a middleground decision between guilty and ngri . it was also motivated by knowledge that an elimination of the insanity verdict itself might be considered unconstitutional , as it had been in strasburg and underwood state . in underwood , judge campbell of the michigan supreme court expressed his sympathies with the abolitionist argument . he acknowledged outrage in response to the absurd lengths to which the defense of insanity has been allowed to go under the fanciful theories of incompetent and dogmatic witnesses , but he believed that the remedy was to be found elsewhere : no doubt many criminals have escaped justice by the weight foolishly given by credulous jurors to evidence which their common sense should have disregarded . but the remedy is to be sought by correcting false notions , and not by destroying the safeguards of private liberty . the gbmi verdict was intended to make it more difficult to reach a verdict of ngri , with the hope that most jurors would respond to the superficial logic of the verdict . opponents of the gbmi verdict have argued that it should be abolished on the grounds that it confuses and deceives jurors . to address the punitive and abolitionist motivation , defenders of the gbmi legislation added a gloss of rehabilitation by arguing that the new verdict provided an explicit means of recognizing that some of those sent to prison were in need of mental health treatment . of course , they did not mention that few , if any , new funds were to be appropriated to the prison system to provide more treatment and that provisions already existed in every state that passed gbmi to laterally transfer a disturbed prisoner to a psychiatric facility for treatment if deemed necessary . in addition , even without the defense , the state is required by the united states constitution to provide basic services to its inmates , and this legislation guaranteed nothing more . in commenting on this entire enterprise , professor richard bonnie bluntly wrote , the guilty but mentally ill verdict should be rejected as nothing more than moral sleight of hand . as packer recently noted , none of the gbmi statutes incorporates conditions leading to lesser punishment , thereby fostering misperceptions regarding the meaning of the verdict . jurors are not entitled to know the nature of the sentences associated with the various forms of mental state defenses , and individuals who are found gbmi are subject to the same penalties as those found guilty . assessment of mental state at the time of the offense . the evaluation process generally includes three major components or sources from which to elicit data : an interview with the defendant ; traditional and forensic assessment instruments ; traditional or forensic assessment instruments ; and third party information , including but not limited to collateral reports , witness statements , victim statements , police reports , and records of various sorts . each of these three major sources of data is reviewed next ; however , the reader is referred to additional sources for more comprehensive and detailed information about the assessment process . in addition , we include a section on the role of delusions in evaluations of criminal responsibility , because the nature and quality of a defendant thought process is often central in determining the extent of impairment in mental state at the time of the offense , particularly in contested cases . inception . in addition to rapport building , the inception relates to informed consent or notification , such that it requires clearly explaining one role to the defendant , focusing on why he or she is being evaluated , who will have access to the information gathered , and what limits are placed on the confidentiality of information . these confidentiality rules vary widely across jurisdictions and are strongly influenced by the context of the case ; therefore , the examiner must be fully informed in this regard , as a matter of professional competence . in most jurisdictions , once defendants have entered their mental state into the adjudication process by interposing an insanity defense or some other mental state claim , no information revealed to the examiner that can be construed as relevant to that claim is protected . jurisdictions differ widely , however , as to whether indirect fruits of such evidence are admissible ; hence , extreme caution is required when preparing a report . the broadest coverage is found in the federal courts : no statement made by a defendant in the course of any examination . with or without the defendant consent , no testimony by the expert based on the statement , and no other fruits of the statement may be admitted into evidence against the defendant in any criminal proceeding except on an issue regarding mental condition on which the defendant has introduced . as noted earlier , however , jurisdictions vary widely , and the examiner must conform his or her practice to the local rules . it is also good practice to allow the defendant to provide his or her version of the events surrounding the time of the offense before the examiner introduces any contradictory evidence or challenges the defendant on any noted inconsistencies . near the end of the interview , the examiner may choose to introduce contradictory evidence in an effort to observe the defendant reaction , evaluate the defendant response style , and determine whether he or she is consciously distorting facts or experiencing bona fide memoryrelated difficulties . reconnaissance . this is a forensically oriented review of the defendant history . it is important to obtain information regarding the defendant history of psychiatric disturbance , treatments received , and general experience of his or her psychiatric condition . of particular importance are prior episodes that may have involved criminal charges and competency evaluations , civil commitments , or other such dispositions . the pattern of mental state disturbance , its relationship to psychotherapeutic and psychopharmacological treatment , medical conditions , situational stressors , and substance use are particularly important . detailed inquiries present mental state and mental state at offense . typically , it is difficult to separate these concepts , because a disturbed defendant usually will be treated with rapidly acting psychotropic medications . nevertheless , it is crucial to bear in mind that these mental states , although related , are separable , albeit with great difficulty . forensic evaluators need to be concerned with riggins factors ,  , that is , alternations in the individual mental state as a function of psychotropic medication . within the context of mso evaluations , defendants are likely to have been treated with psychotropic medications for a long time period following the alleged incident but prior to the evaluation . this can be problematic as the defendant ability to recall and describe his or her prior mental state accurately is potentially impaired . we advise the use of sections of structured and semi structured interviews to cover the domain of psychopathology in a relatively standardized fashion to improve interexaminer reliability in the elicitation and coding of information . the detailed inquiry with respect to the defendant mso must also focus on the relationship of the psychopathological elements to the criminal conduct charged . doing this often involves comparing the defendant reports of his or her mental state and behaviors with various aspects of crime scene evidence . this part of the interview resembles a psychological autopsy . the defendant must be asked to reconstruct his or her thoughts , perceptions , experiences , attitudes , and behavior , as well as those in the field of action during the entire legally significant period . retrospective evaluations present challenges for laypersons , jurors , judges , and examiners alike ; therefore , great care must be taken to obtain detailed information and also to avoid , as much as possible , recallbased contamination of the defendant memories . reconciliation and termination . as emphasized by many advocates and critics of the role of the forensic examiner in the legal process , the role of the expert is not to present legal conclusions or formal psychopathological diagnoses . rather , the role of examiner , as expert , is to import state of the art scientific knowledge about the existence of various psychiatric conditions and their relationship to behavioral , perceptual , cognitive , and judgmental capacities into the legal decisional process , the moral decisional process . thus , at the reconciliation or termination phase , the examiner should be prepared to integrate the information available at this level and to inform all parties concerned , including , as appropriate , the defendant , defense counsel , prosecutor , and other mental health professionals . one advantage of this openness is that it allows the defendant to produce any additional information that might explain or clarify discrepancies , and it also helps prevent an uninformed battle of the experts . in certain grayarea cases , there may be legitimate disagreements among experts . it assists the trier of fact if the nature of these disagreements , as well as areas of agreement , are drawn as precisely as possible , with each examiner fully aware and able to comment in advance as to the reasons for disagreement . such pretestimony consultations also tend to produce higherquality and more informative strategies for direct and crossexamination . forensic assessment instruments . two specialized forensic assessment instruments have been developed to assist in the evaluation of mso . although both of these instruments were developed in the nineteen eighties , standards of forensic practice continue to move in the direction of incorporating forensic assessment instruments in the evaluation of psycholegal issues . mental state at the time of offense screening evaluation . the mental state at the time of the offense screening evaluation is a semistructured interview technique developed to screen out defendants for whom an insanity defense is clearly not applicable . in addition , the mse can also be used to identify those individuals who are obviously insane and therefore do not require a more comprehensive evaluation . the mse is composed of three sections : historical information , which assesses a defendant premorbid psychological and cognitive functioning ; offense information , which accumulates information regarding the offense from the defendant and external sources ; and present mental status examination . although there have not been any published studies of the reliability of the mse , its validity was evaluated by slobogin and colleagues . twenty four mental health professionals were trained to use the mse and were then asked to assess thirty six cases . they were given only a description of the charge and the preliminary hearing transcript prior to their assessment . their decisions were then compared to the decisions of an inpatient forensic evaluation team , which included one psychiatrist , one psychologist , and one social worker . overall , there was satisfactory agreement between trainees and the evaluation team . there was forty four percent agreement on the cases that were screened out . using the decisions made by the evaluation team as the criterion , the decisions made by the trainees were found to have a zero percent falsenegative rate and a twenty eight percent falsepositive rate . compared to the evaluation team decisions , the trainees decisions had less agreement with the court verdict . of the ten defendants for whom the evaluation team suspected some significant mental abnormality , one was convicted , seven had their charges nolle prossed , and two were found insane . of the twenty defendants whom the trainees suspected had some significant mental abnormality , six were convicted as charged , four were convicted of a lesser charge , six had charges nolle prossed , and two were found insane . the limitations of the mse have been addressed in the literature . given the lack of research on its reliability and the limited validity data available , the mse should be viewed as a guide for evaluators to ensure that relevant areas of inquiry are addressed . indeed , evaluators can include the mse in a comprehensive evaluation that would include multiple sources of data . rogers criminal responsibility assessment scales . the rogers criminal responsibility assessment scales were designed to quantify the elements of the ali criteria for criminal nonresponsibility ; however , rogers noted that it might be applicable to the m naughten standard as well . based on a comprehensive evaluation , the examiner rates the defendant with respect to a series of scales grouped into five areas : reliability of report , organicity , psychopathology , cognitive control , and behavioral control . for example , the psychopathology section involves ratings of bizarre behavior , anxiety , amnesia , delusions , hallucinations , depressed or elevated mood , verbal coherence , and affective and thought disorder . in addition , there is a series of more global ratings on final judgments of insanity and impairment . thus , the rcras is an instrument that reflects the relative importance assigned by examiners to the firstorder elements of an insanity decision . it should be noted that these elements are fairly abstract psychological and legal terms and do not necessarily represent the cues that are actually utilized by professional examiners in making their decisions . this was a major issue of contention among rogers , melton , petrila , poythress and slogobin , and golding in the evaluation of this instrument . rogers believes it is important to quantify the issue ; however , it would be unfair to assume that he did not recognize the value of qualitative data . golding and melton agreed that quantification is essentially illusory at this stage in the development of evaluations of criminal responsibility . both groups of authors agree , in large measure , on the domains or conceptual elements to be addressed . rogers and sewell responded to the criticisms of melton by attempting to extend the rcras construct validity via the reanalysis of two data sets to address contributions of individual variables to the various components of the decision model . on the basis of discriminant function analysis , the authors concluded that the rcras variables were able to form differentiating patterns for each of the five components of the decision model . results indicated average hit rates of ninety four percent , and the average variance accounted for was sixty three percent . factor analysis of the rcras items has resulted in three factors bizarre behavior , high activity , and high anxiety that do not mirror the five scales . rogers has reported modest interrater reliabilities at the item level , with lower values associated with the product question , which is one of the most frequent sources of disagreement in contested trials . final judgments with the rcras have also been associated with reasonable levels of agreement between examiners and triers of fact . these findings are in general accord with the levels of agreement found between clinicians and courts in other studies of final judgment that use no formalized interviews or rating scales . unfortunately , all studies in this area appear to use criterioncontaminated groups , because the examination process was part of the judicial determination . a number of proposals for semistructured protocols to assist in the evaluation of mental state at time of the offense have been made . they share in common an openended structure , with special attention to developing multisource data , identification of legally and psychologically relevant dimensions of the criminal responsibility evaluation , and disclosure of the logical links in an evaluator reasoning . the need to develop such a comprehensive analysis is clear . these less structured approaches have been shown to be empirically useful in various contexts , but they have not been studied in the same fashion as the rcras . the rcras and less structured mso evaluation techniques make their most important contributions by clarifying the underlying bases for professional judgment for the trier of fact , thus potentially highlighting the areas of disagreement so that expert testimony can be of more assistance to judge or juror . there is much reason to believe that forensic examiners reach their generally high level of agreement in ultimate opinions by different logical and empirically sustainable routes . the critical issue remains the association between organic or psychopathological disturbance and control judgment capacities , disturbance and moral judgement capacities ; these devices are most useful when they serve the heuristic value of highlighting the aspects of the defendant psychological state that are relevant , describing a purported relationship to control and judgment capacities , and organizing known data about the empirical relationships between disorder and psychological capacities in various states and situations . third party information . it is a commonly accepted standard of practice that forensic evaluators examine the consistency of mental health history and other archival data along with details of the crime scene and witnesses accounts of the defendant before , during , and after the alleged incident . this consideration of consistency is relevant to issues of malingering and aids in supporting or challenging various psychological interpretations of the defendant mso . the importance of this aspect of a forensic examination at the time of the offense has been addressed in numerous sources . forensic evaluators need to pay close attention to crime scene data as well as to more traditional sources of thirdparty information . all such sources need to be integrated in as straightforward a manner as possible . where limited scientific data exist to support the inference , they should be referenced , and where otherwise indicated , the evaluator logical link analysis should be presented and scrutinized . as melton noted , the role of the forensic evaluator is not to conclusively resolve all conflicting accounts about the case but rather to conduct an evaluation that can be scrutinized in terms of all available evidence , both psychological and behavioral . modern forensic standards of practice are to address the issue of the consistency of behavioral crime scene evidence with psycholegal formulations and allow the trier of fact to make the determination of their significance , guided by whatever scientific evidence can be directly or indirectly adduced . role of delusions in assessment of criminal responsibility . the nature and quality of a defendant delusions are central in determining the extent of impairment impacting his or her mso . several issues are involved . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . in contested cases , forensic examiners are particularly apt to encounter defendants with extreme or idiosyncratic beliefs about religion , politics , or personal identity , and questions regarding the delusional basis for those beliefs will arise . delusionality also enters the adjudicatory process when the issues of intentionality , compulsion , or the reasonableness of the defendant conduct may be related to a delusion . finally , delusionality is an important aspect of risk assessment with respect to release decisions . although there are surprisingly few studies on the frequency and nature of delusions of ngri defendants , indirect data , as well as experience , suggest that delusionality is a vital issue . delusions are prevalent among individuals with psychotic disorders . furthermore , roughly half of defendants who raise the insanity defense and seventy percent of insanity acquittees have psychotic diagnoses . moreover , delusions have been shown to be specifically and substantially related to violence . in an extensive analysis of case records , hafner and boker found that seventy percent of individuals who were diagnosed with schizophrenia and accused of homicide harbored delusional beliefs about their relationship with their victim . similarly , in an interviewbased study , taylor found that forty percent of psychotic defendants reported acting directly on their delusions during their offenses . the frequency of nonpathological but radical religious and political beliefs , and the extent of the relationship between these beliefs and violence , have not been systematically studied ; however , defendants whose criminal acts are related to such fervently held beliefs are clearly plausible candidates for mso evaluations wherein a primary focus will be the determination of whether these extreme beliefs are delusional . distinguishing between radical beliefs and delusions is a difficult , but critical , task in the assessment of criminal responsibility . respecting the principles of autonomy and selfdetermination , our legal system holds responsible the extremist who chooses to act on a radical system of beliefs , expressing his or her desires , values , and personhood through the crime . the basic moral logic of the insanity defense , however , excuses the mentally disordered individual who acts on a pathological , uncontrollable belief system that distorts his or her sense of reality , thereby impairing the capacity for rational choice . arguably , the same logic also applies to delusions that would justify the actions . notwithstanding the centrality of this issue in assessing criminal responsibility , there are few empirical studies or practice standards available to aid in assessing the delusionality of beliefs . in grayarea cases , or cases in which defendants are not clearly disordered , the classification of beliefs as delusional is presumably a major source of disagreement among examiners . there is no bright line of demarcation between extreme beliefs and delusions . moreover , religious and political belief systems that reference nonphysical entities and events are not scientifically testable ; consequently , there is no full standard of truth independent of what the says . for these reasons , in this section we review recent progress in defining and assessing delusions and their likely consequences . the purpose of this section is to introduce readers to the complex issues involved in assessing delusions and in conducting informed assessments of defendants beliefs in the context of insanity evaluations . emphasis is placed on issues relevant to distinguishing between extreme religious or political beliefs and delusions . defining and conceptualizing delusions . in the text revision of the fourth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , a delusion is defined as : a false belief based on incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly sustained despite what almost everyone else believes and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary . the belief is not one ordinarily accepted by other members of the person culture or subculture . when a false belief involves a value judgment , it is regarded as a delusion only when the judgment is so extreme as to defy credibility . although this definition is adequate for most clinical and clinicalforensic purposes , its shortcomings are readily apparent when one attempts to delineate its boundaries . as noted , there is often no standard of proof by which one can assess the falsity of beliefs in many religious , political , or identity systems . similarly , it is difficult to evaluate the incredibility or implausibility of beliefs , because clinicians may not agree on the extent to which certain beliefs are bizarre . the degree of conviction with which a belief is held also does not clearly distinguish between those that are delusional and nondelusional . like delusional beliefs , nondelusional but highly valued beliefs are often held with great zeal and intensity , even in the face of contradictory evidence . moreover , many persons shift between periods in which they experience certainty about their delusions and periods in which they demonstrate partial or full insight . these difficulties are frequently compounded by ambiguity surrounding the presence or absence of cultural support for the person belief . it is difficult to determine the extent to which the nature of a belief , its experience , or its expression must deviate from that accepted by a designated subgroup to be classified as delusional . clearly , examiners must have considerable knowledge of the social , religious , political , and even scientific context of a defendant belief to adequately assess its delusionality . failure to carefully consider patients cultural and religious backgrounds often results in misdiagnoses . most current attempts to systematically analyze delusions are based on the seminal work of jaspers , who provided the most comprehensive , enduring , and clinically useful theory for distinguishing among various categories of delusional and nondelusional beliefs . a simplified summary of this theory focused on differentiating delusional from nondelusional beliefs is presented here . jaspers argued that the criteria of level of conviction , imperviousness to counterargument , and impossibility or bizarreness were insufficient external criteria that did not capture the essence of delusionality . rather , overvalued beliefs , or even delusionlike ideas , could be distinguished from primary delusions , based on jaspers approach , by attention to three fundamental criteria : primary delusions are distinguished from secondary delusions and beliefs that are merely overvalued based on the extent and nature of their ununderstandability . primary delusions are unmediated by thought , analysis , deduction , or reflection , whereas overvalued ideas and secondary delusions reflect varying degrees of cognitive appraisal and inference . primary delusions reflect a distinctive change in an individual personality functioning ; that is , they are a distinct change in the totality of the individual personal meanings and ways of construing the world . an overvalued idea is an understandable product of cognitive interpretation and can be viewed in terms of an individual personality , life experiences , and sociocultural background . overvalued ideas can be understood as exaggerations , diminutions , or combinations of phenomena which we ourselves experience . in contrast , a secondary delusion is understandable only in the sense that it emerges through one process of reasoning about psychopathological experiences . a primary delusion is not understandable because it originates in a direct , immediate experience of new meaning unmediated by thought and unconnected to the person fundamental personality . thus , whereas overvalued ideas have clear precedent in an individual existing personality and meaningful life events , secondary delusions emerge from other psychopathological experiences , and primary delusions fundamentally change an individual personality or way of looking at the world . although jaspers classification has not been subject to much empirical research and can be criticized for relying too heavily on the subjective criterion of understandability , his theory provides useful guidance in conceptualizing the key distinctions between delusions and overvalued ideas . issues in the treatment and release of insanity acquittees . inherent in the decision to find a defendant not guilty by reason of insanity is concern about the ultimate disposition of such acquittees . jurors place a great deal of emphasis on this issue in their deliberations . a comparison of data on the rates and success of insanity pleas and the nature of insanity dispositions with data on public perceptions about these issues clearly reveals that the public overestimates the frequency and successfulness of the insanity plea and underestimates the nature and length of institutionalization following an insanity acquittal . in shannon united states , the supreme court held that ngri defendants have no right to a jury instruction that explains the post acquittal commitment process , because such an instruction would violate the longstanding principle that a jury must base its verdict on the evidence with which it was presented . a recent case in maine returned a comparable holding . in state okie , the supreme judicial court of maine ruled that jury instructions needed to be accurate with respect to the law but that it was not appropriate to inform the jury of the consequences of an insanity verdict . the court holding was based on legal precedent or historical precedent , which is in line with federal law , and based on the fact that judges , not juries , impose sentences . although this may be correct jurisprudential theory , it violates common sense justice , in that we have strong reason to believe that jurors do pay attention to this issue and that these assumptions are incorrect . in a similar regard , in foster state , the georgia supreme court unanimously reversed a murder conviction because the trial court did not define mentally ill and mentally retarded for the jury . the court held that , by not being provided with these definitions , the jury was unable to make an adequate assessment of the conditions and therefore could not properly consider potential verdicts . contrary to strong public concerns , ngri acquittees are not easily released . in fact , research indicates that they are more likely to remain institutionalized for longer periods of time than crimeequivalent guilty persons . the constitutionality of this likelihood has been justified by the us supreme court on the grounds that the purpose of their commitment is to treat their dangerousness , not to punish them for a crime for which they were not culpable . a number of factors contribute to this typically lengthy treatment and slow release process . first , ngri acquittees are likely to be severely mentally disordered persons for whom currently available treatment , both biochemical and psychosocial , has been ineffective . this is not because they are necessarily bad people or nonadherent to treatment regimens , but because , contrary to medical and pharmaceutical company myth , about onethird of severely mentally disordered individuals fail to show meaningful clinical responses to such treatment . such individuals may also become nonadherent as a result of a complex psychological process . that is , unless patients perceive a subjective benefit from treatment , they are less likely to tolerate unpleasant side effects . mental health professionals who establish an authoritarian or paternalistic as opposed to a collaborative approach are also more likely to contribute to nonadherence . where such problems in the therapeutic relationship exist , medications are frequently delusionally reinterpreted as the cause for psychotic symptoms . thus , the typical ngri admission has a history of unsuccessful treatment , the most recent treatment frequently occurring only months before the index offense . second , because one dangerousness is linked , by virtue of the plea , to his or her mental disorder , the person is unlikely to be released until he or she is deemed psychiatrically stable . furthermore , as illustrated in jones and foucha , the person can be committed and held for what amounts to an indeterminant length of time . stredny , parker , and dibble examined the characteristics of recently hospitalized insanity acquittees in virginia and found that individuals diagnosed with mood and anxiety disorders were less likely to receive recommendations for inpatient commitment than those diagnosed with psychotic disorders . they also found psychologists and psychiatrists to generally agree on recommendations for the ultimate release of insanity acquittees , with inpatient recommendations more commonly occurring for those with histories of self injury and suicide attempts , family or other psychosocial issues , and a lack of structured activities in the community . psychologists also tended to recommend commitment when a weapon was used during the commission of the crime , and both groups were more likely to recommend commitment when a person was transferred to the hospital from jail as opposed to from the community . in another study , mangunomire , thompson , bertmanpate , burnett , and thompson reviewed the records of ninety one insanity acquittees in a maximum security forensic hospital in louisiana and found that the psychopathy checklistrevised scores and age at which the subject committed the first criminal offense were related to release recommendations . specifically , those with higher levels of psychopathy and those who engaged in criminal behavior at a younger age were less likely to be recommended for release . third , political realities based on the sensational publicity produced by the media , in large part because they perpetuate insanity defense myths in failed ngri releases , make decision makers quite cautious . finally , few jurisdictions have an articulated prerelease risk assessment , postrelease risk management , and intensive case management system capable of more safely handling the community adjustment and supervision needed for such individuals . an unstudied aspect of the dispositional issue concerns the ultimate costs and effectiveness of placing prototypical insanity acquittees in forensic treatment contexts versus placement in traditional correctional facilities . although some data clearly support the monitored release of ngri acquittees , the trend , in those states with either gbmi or highly restricted insanity defenses , is to place such defendants in correctional environments for the majority of their sentence or institutionalization . wiederanders and golding and colleagues demonstrated that articulated followup of insanity acquittees in the community is feasible and worthy of study . what we do not have is informative data on the differences between similar individuals treated in correctional versus forensic mental health contexts . we know of no empirical studies of this issue . with respect to mental health economics , the question is whether society eventually pays more or less for treating mentally disordered offenders in prison versus forensic mental health systems . clearly , the cost per diem while initially incarcerated will favor prison over mental health system dispositions ; however , the analysis also needs to include days institutionalized and days in the community at lower cost as well as the likelihood and financial , emotional , and moral costs of recidivism . again , we know of no direct data , but , on logical grounds , we propose that treated and supervised mentally ill and dangerous offenders ultimately would cost less , financially and emotionally , than incarcerated mentally ill offenders who receive less mental health treatment and supervision . as is evident from this discussion , clinicians face a multitude of issues with respect to the assessment and disposition of ngri defendants . we now turn to a review of empirical research developments regarding many of these issues . empirical developments regarding criminal responsibility . research in the area of criminal responsibility has taken a number of forms . we have conceptualized this research as falling into three broad areas : research on ngri verdicts , including the frequency of ngri verdicts , rates of agreement between experts as well as between experts and the courts with respect to ngri opinions , and the characteristics of ngri acquittees . next we present a brief overview of each of these three areas . the reader is referred to other sources for a more detailed and comprehensive review of this literature . research on ngri verdicts . research on the empirical realities of the adjudication of criminal responsibility has continued to demonstrate the same basic phenomena since earlier reviews . the research has focused primarily on describing the ngri population in traditional demographic and diagnostic terms and at demythologizing public misconceptions of the insanity defense . frequency of ngri verdicts . research indicates that the ngri defense is seldom raised , averaging less than one percent of total felony indictments , and is highly variable in its success rate , with a modal rate of twenty five percent for those who raise the issue . cirincione , steadman , and mcgreevy surveyed seven states with respect to the frequency of insanity pleas and the likelihood of insanity acquittals and found an inverse relationship between the two factors . that is , states wherein insanity plea rates were high had a lower insanity acquittal rate . these authors found an average rate of insanity pleas of eighty five per one hundred felony indictments and an aggregated success rate of twenty eight percent . silver and colleagues cited highly variable success rates , ranging from seven percent to eighty seven percent and averaging twenty six percent . cirincione and jacobs attempted to collect data on each state with respect to the annual number of insanity acquittals and , despite valiant efforts , were able to obtain data from only thirty six states . for these thirty six states , the mean number of insanity acquittals was thirty three per state per year , with a median of seventeen and a standard deviation of forty one california and florida had the highest average number of insanity acquittals per year , and new mexico and south dakota had the lowest , with six states reporting no more than one insanity acquittal per year . rates of agreement . there is a high rate of agreement among forensic experts with similar levels of training , experience , and methodology and high levels of agreement between examiner opinions and judge or juror decisions with respect to insanity opinions . research on the reliability of forensic judgments indicates that the types of cases likely to be contested include issues of an axis i diagnosis with a comorbid personality disorder diagnosis ; highly idiosyncratic and paranoid religious , political , or identity systems ; intoxication or failure to take medications ; and extremely bizarre conduct . ngri verdicts typically are achieved as either a stipulation between defense and prosecution or bench trials , and they rarely involve contested battles of experts in front of jurors . research on interexaminer agreement is of limited utility , because it focuses on global agreement . research on the logic and structure of examiner decision making in competency to stand trial evaluations has demonstrated high levels of global agreement in ultimate conclusions but poor agreement in examiner logic , particularly as it pertains to defendants specific abilities and incapacities . in theory , we would expect the same in ngri evaluations . similarly , we know of no empirical study of the crime characteristics that lead actual judicial decision makers or forensic examiners to conclude that the defendant lacked the legally or morally relevant mso . this point is particularly crucial , because few examiners , in our experience , pay close attention to collateral reports or crime scene data with respect to its consistency with their inferences about a defendant mental state . unfortunately , this type of sociodemographic research does not address the more theoretically interesting question of what types of mental disorder characteristics and what aspects of offense incident characteristics influence expert , judge , and juror decision making . callahan and silver studied the factors associated with the conditional release of ngri acquittees in four states and found great variance . in connecticut , few individuals were likely to be released conditionally , regardless of their characteristics . in new york , however , demographic characteristics were most predictive of conditional release : females , whites , and high school graduates were most likely to be conditionally released . in maryland , clinical prognosis was the most critical variable , with those defendants with schizophrenia being less likely than those with other major mental illnesses to be granted conditional release . in ohio , the nature of the crime was the most significant predictor , with serious offenders less likely to be released . it is somewhat concerning that in new york , the variables most predictive of conditional release were related neither to crime characteristics nor psychiatric variables . in a recent study , dirkslinhorst and kondrat analyzed twenty seven years of ngri acquittals in missouri . those who committed homicide were less likely to have obtained conditional release as compared to ngri acquittees who committed other offenses , which the study authors believed was likely attributable to one or more of these issues : their symptoms may take longer to manage ; the gravity of their offenses results in more caution in release decisions , thereby requiring murder acquittees to demonstrate longer periods of behavioral and psychiatric stability ; and that admission to a more secure facility likely results in greater lengths of stay . revocation rates of conditional release vary widely . variables such as being white , employed , and married are indicative of successful conditional release . monson , gunnin , fogel and kyle examined the factors related to the revocation of conditional release in a sample of one hundred and twenty five ngri acquittees and found that minority status , criminal history , and a substance use diagnosis were significantly predictive of revocation of conditional release . vitacco investigated factors related to failure to maintain conditional release across all ngri acquittees in wisconsin over a fiveyear period . these researchers found that diagnosis of substance abuse , previous revocation of conditional release , and the experience of needing psychiatric hospitalization were all related to revocation of conditional release . in a followup study that focused on female insanity acquittees conditionally released to the community over a sevenyear period in wisconsin , vitacco found that fifty two of the females maintained their conditional release , whereas twenty four had it revoked due to rule violations or criminal behavior but not violent behavior . of the twenty four females whose release was revoked , six were released again , and five of the six engaged in behaviors leading to a second revocation , suggesting that prior revocation is a risk factor for future revocation . research on judicial instruction . jurors are expected to determine an appropriate verdict by conscientiously applying the law to a fair evaluation of the evidence . as suggested , the effects of language differences in legal standards for insanity have been intensely debated for over two centuries . the nature and outcome of these debates , however , have shown either weak or little practical effect on jurors . research repeatedly demonstrates that mock jurors often do not apply judicial instruction on various legal definitions of insanity in rendering verdicts . for example , the insanity defense reform act was formulated after john hinckley acquittal to narrow the language of the ali standard , with the intention of curbing the number of insanity verdicts . in an analog study , finkel found no verdict differences among mock jurors who were provided idra instructions , ali instructions , or very narrow wild beast instructions . in fact , researchers have found that it is typically inconsequential whether jurors are given any test or standard . mock jurors who receive no insanity definitions or who are told to use their best lights judgment to decide a case produce verdict patterns indistinguishable from those of mock jurors who receive various insanity test instructions . as diamond observed , many of the effects and their strength depend on the way the verdicts are formulated , the verdict alternatives , and the existence of contextual effects , for example . the fact that jurors determine whether a defendant is sane or insane without the guidance of specific legal instructions suggests that they rely on their own knowledge about insanity and other cognitive structures to make these decisions . such does not imply that jurors nullify instructions ; rather , that their own implicit theories of insanity and responsibility guide their interpretation of the admittedly vague and nonspecific linguistic terms of insanity standards . research on the gbmi verdict option indicates that mock jurors who opt for the gbmi verdict option tend to be more moderate in their ratings of deserved blame and punishment as well as in their ratings of a defendant level of mental disorder , capacity to display rational behavior , and capacity to control psychotic beliefs than mock jurors selecting ngri or guilty verdicts . poulson , wuensch , and brondino found that the addition of the gbmi verdict option resulted in a twofold effect : a reduction in guilty verdicts by about twothirds and a reduction of ngri verdicts by about onehalf . these authors concluded that the gbmi verdict appears to function as a compromise verdict . poulson and his colleagues found that mock jurors attitudes were reflected in their verdict selections . for example , jurors who opted for guilty verdicts held a crimecontrol orientation , favorable attitudes toward the death penalty , and unfavorable attitudes toward the insanity defense . the opposite was true of those jurors who opted for an ngri verdict . research on judicial instructions has highlighted the importance of providing jurors with the opportunity to deliberate . wheatman and shaffer found that dispositional instructions had no effect on the verdict preferences of individual jurors ; however , after given the opportunity to deliberate as a jury , postdeliberation shifts in mock jurors initial verdict preferences were evident . uninstructed juries were more likely to shift toward a harsher verdict after deliberation , whereas instructed juries were more likely to shift toward more lenient verdicts after deliberation . these results underscore the importance not only of dispositional instructions but also the opportunity for jurors to deliberate as juries . research on jury and juror decision making . although the legal system implicitly assumes that people are blank slates who can apply the law in a wholly evidencebased fashion , research indicates that people have knowledge structures that reflect their life experiences and guide their behavior . these knowledge structures include constructs such as attitudes , schemas , prototypes , and stereotypes , and they appear highly relevant to legal decision making . several sources of research suggest that individual differences in these structures are critical in understanding why jurors reach particular verdicts in insanity defense cases . jurors caserelevant attitudes . the insanity defense is controversial and involves scientific as well as politicalmoral issues . although public opinion polls and empirical studies often find support for the basic logic of the insanity defense , they consistently reveal powerful negative attitudes toward it . for example , roberts , golding , and fincham found that , although seventy eight percent of their subjects believed that severe mental illness suggested impairment in one capacity to make rational decisions and form criminal intent , sixty six percent believed that insanity should not be allowed as a complete criminal defense . across studies , results reflect a primary concern that the insanity defense is an easily abused loophole in the law that allows many offenders to escape punishment . additional concerns include beliefs that insanity is easily feigned and that the public is poorly protected from dangerous criminals who are adjudicated insane . similarly , jurors casespecific negative attitudes toward both mental health experts and individuals with severe mental illness appear to affect their decision making in insanity defense cases . many of these concerns reflect inaccurate knowledge about the insanity defense . such myths are not only prevalent but may also be inflexible . jeffrey and pasewark presented participants with factual statistics on the frequency and success rate of the insanity defense . approximately half of the participants maintained their opinion that the insanity defense was overused and abused despite having seen contradictory evidence . especially troubling is the robust finding that these prevalent , potentially inflexible , negative attitudes toward the insanity defense considerably influence mock jurors verdicts in insanity cases . for example , roberts and golding found that mock jurors attitudes toward the insanity defense were more strongly associated with their verdicts than were the study design variables , which included manipulations of available verdict categories and case facts . the most determinative dimension underlying these attitudes was mock jurors beliefs in strict liability . thus , jurors verdicts may depend more on their attitudes and opinions than on case facts and court instruction . despite strong evidence of the biasing effect of negative attitudes toward the insanity defense on verdicts , bias often may go undetected as a result of limitations in current knowledge and legal procedures . sloat and frierson found that only about four percent of their sample could correctly identify the definitions and dispositions of defendants found ngri and gbmi . despite the abundance of research on insanity defense attitudes , no wellvalidated measure of these attitudes has been developed . skeem and golding presented one of the first checklists of jurors conceptions that , they suggested , could be adapted into a questionnaire to assess prospective jurors conceptions of the typical person who is not responsible for his criminal actions due to mental illness . except in cases involving interracial violent crimes , capital punishment , or pretrial publicity , judges have broad discretion in selecting the topics to be addressed during voir dire . although insanity defense cases likely invoke equally powerful biases , the case law reflects a trend in which judges refuse to inquire about bias against the insanity defense or even allow the empanelment of jurors who express biases against the defense or against persons with mental illness . in our opinion , the voir dire process ideally would be reformed to allow for routine examination of prospective jurors caserelevant preconceptions and attitudes in insanity defense cases . jurors case construals . additional lines of research suggest that jurors views are critical . in addition to their casespecific attitudes , jurors individual ways of interpreting evidence are related to their verdicts . mock jurors draw different inferences about defendants cognitive and volitional impairments when given identical case descriptions . these inferences , in turn , strongly predict their verdicts . for example , roberts and golding presented mock jurors with case vignettes in which they manipulated available verdict categories , the relationship of the defendant paranoid delusion to the crime , and the planfulness of the crime . the attituderelated ways in which mock jurors interpreted the case evidence were the most powerful predictors of verdict choice . for example , individual differences in jurors perceptions of the extent to which a defendant was mentally disordered , capable of rational behavior , capable of acting differently , or capable of understanding the wrongfulness of his or her behavior explained substantially more variance in verdicts than did the objective manipulation of case evidence . finkel and handel , using different methodology , also found that jurors actively construct the meaning of case information in rendering verdicts . they presented mock jurors with four vastly different case vignettes and asked them to render a verdict and explain the reasoning underlying their decisions . using a rationally derived categorization scheme , they found that mock jurors cited multiple , rational reasons for their decisions in each case . the pattern of the cited constructs or reasons systematically differed based on the mock jurors verdicts . in essence , then , jurors construed case information in complex , discriminating ways that were consistent with their verdict choices . similarly , whittemore and ogloff found that differences in mock jurors perceptions of a defendant mental state at the time of the trial predicted their verdicts . despite manipulation of the defendant mental state at the time of trial , mock jurors differed in their perceptions of the extent to which given defendants were mentally disordered . when mock jurors inferred that the defendant was psychotic at the time of the trial , they were more likely to conclude that the defendant was insane . jurors implicit theories or prototypes of insanity . thus , jurors construct the meaning of case information . these constructions , or interpretations , are more strongly associated with jurors verdicts than the case as objectively presented and appear unaffected by judicial instruction . based on these findings , several commentators have argued that jurors render insanity verdicts by carefully resorting to their personal knowledge or implicit theories of insanity . however , the nature of these theories and the process by which they affect verdicts remains unclear . researchers who have examined the nature of mock jurors conceptions of insanity based on jurors judgments about insanity case vignettes have found somewhat conflicting results with respect to the relative importance of various construal dimensions . to date , studies that directly analyze what people mean by insane in the context of a consideration of actual jury decisions are virtually nonexistent :  what everybody knows about insanity is perilously unchartered . finkel and colleagues conducted research examining jurors conceptions of insanity by using a prototype theory of categorization . finkel and groscup found that undergraduate subjects described insanity cases as involving young defendants with a history of strain , mental disorder , violence , and abuse who perpetrate various crimes , including murder , on strangers after various precipitating events . for successful insanity cases , the defendant motive is related to a grandiose delusion ; for unsuccessful cases , revenge is the motive . skeem and golding identified three prototypes of insanity that were systematically related to jurors caserelevant attitudes and demographic characteristics : severe mental disability , the prototype representing the majority of the jurors and characterized by an emphasis on severe , longstanding , functional impairment and intellectual disability that is resistant to treatment ; moral insanity , the prototype representing about onethird of the jurors and characterized by an emphasis on traits of psychopathy , psychosis , and violent , unpredictable behavior ; and mental state centered , the prototype representing about onefifth of the jurors and characterized by a narrow focus on issues relevant to the defendant impaired mso . these prototypes were related to differences in the ways jurors interpreted case information and rendered verdicts , such that the jurors with mental statecentered prototypes were more likely to render verdicts of ngri and more likely to perceive defendants as less worthy of punishment , less able to control their beliefs , and more mentally disordered . jurors decisions are not determined solely by subjective factors . although individual differences in socialmoral cognition appear most critical in understanding jurors verdicts , objective manipulation of case facts does have some impact on jurors verdicts . for example , the level of a defendant mental disorder and the planfulness and bizarreness of the crime are associated with jurors verdicts . as noted earlier , the characteristics of insanity acquittees suggest that juror and judicial decision making is rational and relatively consistent . in this chapter we provided a broad overview of a number of issues and considerations regarding empirical , legal and clinical aspects of criminal responsibility . there has been a great deal of discussion and controversy surrounding various legal standards or tests of criminal responsibility , and research indicates that this discussion and controversy may be all for naught , given that judicial instructions do not appear to have a significant impact on juries verdicts . this being said , however , recent research has begun to address various issues requiring further consideration . such issues include the role that deliberation plays in jury decision making and verdicts and in the impact of juror prototypes on verdicts and the interpretation of case information . future research that incorporates samples of juryeligible adults will help further this important body of knowledge . similarly , clinically oriented research will help further develop our assessment techniques and interventions for defendants for whom criminal responsibility is an issue . 