defining forensic psychology . there is no consensual definition of forensic psychology . perhaps it is surprising , given the relatively long history and growth of forensic psychology over the past forty years , that there is no uniform or consensual definition for this specialty area , and most differences involve how narrowly or broadly the field is defined . definitions range from expansive ones that include any application of psychology to any legal matters to those that are narrower and typically are limited to clinical and counseling psychologists involvement in legal matters as examiners , treatment providers , or consultants . examples of more expansive definitions include those offered by huss , who defined forensic psychology as any application of psychology to the legal system ; the american psychological association , which in its specialty guidelines for forensic psychology indicated that forensic psychology refers to professional practice by any psychologist working within any subdiscipline of psychology when applying the scientific , technical , or specialized knowledge of psychology to the law to assist in addressing legal , contractual , and administrative matters ; and the american board of forensic psychology , which described forensic psychology as the application of the science and profession of psychology to questions and issues relating to law and the legal system . in contrast , in its petition to the apa committee for the recognition of specialties and proficiencies in professional psychology to establish forensic psychology as a psychological specialty , the forensic specialty council offered a more narrow definition : forensic psychology is the professional practice by psychologists within the areas of clinical psychology , counseling psychology , school psychology or another specialty recognized by the american psychological association , when they are engaged as experts and represent themselves as such , in an activity primarily intended to provide professional psychological expertise to the judicial system . brigham observed that these differences are more than semantic , and the varying definitions have distinct advantages and disadvantages . whereas adopting a broad definition , according to brigham , could promote growth and coherence in the field and facilitate development of graduate training programs , he acknowledged that grouping clinical psychologists with nonclinicians could prove complicated and perhaps problematic given the very different training and licensure requirements that often apply . indeed , brigham reported that disagreement among members of apls about how broad or narrow the definition should be initially led the group to abandon a cooperative effort with the american academy of forensic psychology to jointly sponsor a petition to have apa formally recognize forensic psychology as a specialty . adding to the confusion , how the terms forensic psychology or psychology and law are defined differs internationally . conventionally , the entire field including both clinical or applied areas and research areas has been referred to as psychology and law or law and psychology in north america and continental europe , whereas the term forensic psychology has been more commonly employed in the united kingdom , australia and new zealand . in countries that use the term forensic psychology in an expansive way , those who work in the applied areas of psychology and the law typically are referred to as clinical forensic psychologists . regardless of the differences that exist concerning the definition of forensic psychology , it is uniformly agreed that forensic psychology involves the application of psychological knowledge and expertise to the legal system . to this end , forensic psychologists work at the interface of psychology and the law . as forensic psychologists work with legal actors , including attorneys , judges , and others in the justice system , a number of tensions exist . although commentators have characterized these tensions differently , a number of common themes emerge . drawing on the framework provided by haney , we present eight differences between psychology and law that may contribute to tensions between the disciplines . the emphasis in law is stare decisis , whereas in psychology the emphasis is on creativity . in the law , past cases and matters such as constitutional interpretation rather than innovation or creativity are painstakingly relied on for the development of legal arguments . the model adopted in law is one of legal precedent . in contrast , in psychology , the model is one of innovation , and psychologists , in both research and applied work , are encouraged continually to explore new ideas and methods . law is hierarchical whereas psychology is empirical . decisions within the legal system are hierarchically based and authoritative , with lower courts bound by the decisions of higher courts . in psychology , however , it is the accumulation of a body of consistent and supporting data that confirms the validity of a particular position or claim , not its authoritative declaration . law relies on the adversarial method , whereas psychology relies on the experimental method . the law seeks justice , which equates to procedural fairness . it is hoped that just procedures will assist in arriving at the truth ; however , knowing that the truth is elusive , it is seen as more important to ensure that the principles of due process are followed . to arrive at the truth in law , conflicting points of view are presented within the strict parameters of a trial or appellate hearing , with each side putting its best case forward . bias , self interest , and advocacy are not only permitted but heralded as one of the strengths of the process . indeed , what is of immediate concern and the driving force for the opposing lawyers is victory . psychology , in contrast to law , attempts to arrive at truth using a variety of diverse data gathering methods . common to all of these methods is the systematic collection of data , using procedures that attempt to reduce bias , error and distortion in observation and inferences . although this is not to say that bias does not enter into the research process , the goal of the psychologist is to attain an objective understanding of the phenomena rather than victory over a particular viewpoint . law is prescriptive , whereas psychology is descriptive . the law is primarily prescriptive , telling people how they should behave , whereas psychology is essentially a descriptive discipline , seeking to describe behavior as it actually occurs . this dimension captures a difference in the values espoused in the disciplines , with law outlining how one ought to behave and psychology adopting a more nonjudgmental orientation of how people do behave . law is idiographic , whereas psychology is nomothetic . law operates on a case by case basis , with each case decided on the basis of its specific facts . in contrast , psychology is interested in uncovering the general principles , relationships , and patterns that govern human behavior . the focus in psychology is not on a particular instance but rather on what transcends the particular instance . decision making in law is based on the appearance of certainty , whereas decision making in psychology is based on probabilistic evidence . the decisions made in the law typically take on a dichotomous , all or nothing quality the accused in a criminal trial is deemed either guilty or not guilty , the defendant in a civil case is found liable or not liable . psychologists , in contrast , operate in terms of probabilities ; for example , claims are asserted on the basis of evidence associated with a probability level . as a result , conclusions drawn by psychologists typically are qualified and not categorical by nature . law is reactive , whereas psychology is proactive . the issues that arise in the law originate from outside the system , namely , cases are brought to the attention of lawyers . in contrast , psychologists , notwithstanding the presence of various external pressures , have considerable control over the issues they study . law is operational , whereas psychology is academic . law is an applied discipline , and it is designed to deal with real world problems . the players within the system have clearly defined roles that prescribe the issues on which they will concentrate . in contrast , similar to the distinction noted previously , psychologists have considerable say over the issues they pursue . the driving force tends to be more of a quest for knowledge for its own sake . with these eight tensions in mind , included in what follows is an expansive survey of what can be characterized as forensic psychology . at a macro level , forensic psychologists can assist the legal system in four ways : providing legal decision makers with information about complicated matters that they would not otherwise have , assisting specific legal actors , researching the legal system and its operation , and researching psychological phenomena that are of particular interest or relevance to the legal system . psychologists assisting the legal system . psychologists assist the legal system in a number of ways including providing expert testimony in legal , administrative , and legislative proceedings ; conducting and testifying about research conducted in anticipation of litigation ; testifying about research not conducted in connection with litigation but that is nonetheless relevant ; and researching the legal system operation . every day in the united states and other countries , thousands of psychologists appear before and provide expert opinions to courts , administrative proceedings , attorneys , and legislative hearings via reports and sworn testimony . psychologists involvement in these matters is predicated on the assumption that their observations and opinions will educate the recipient about some psychological phenomena that are relevant to the legal matters in dispute , and , as a result , a more accurate and presumably better decision will be made . psychologists participation in this way is based on the premise that , in some cases , legal decision makers must consider complicated psychological matters that are beyond their understanding , and their judgments would benefit from the insights and opinions of someone with specialized knowledge about the matter , such as a psychologist . indeed , federal rule of evidence seven hundred and two makes clear under what circumstances psychologists are permitted to testify : a witness who is qualified as an expert by knowledge , skill , experience , training , or education may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise if : the expert scientific , technical , or other specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue ; the testimony is based on sufficient facts or data ; the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods ; and the expert has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts of the case . conducting and testifying about forensic psychological evaluations . most frequently , psychologists provide assistance to the legal system by offering observations and opinions about the emotional , behavioral , and/or cognitive functioning of someone whose mental state is at issue in a legal proceeding . these activities are quite varied and range from involvement in criminal proceedings in which the competence of a defendant to stand trial is in dispute to civil proceedings in which the court is faced with making decisions about what type of living and legal arrangements would be in a child best interests in the case of divorcing parents who can not reach an agreement about these matters . in these cases , psychologists are offering observations and opinions about a specific person who has been evaluated , and these observations and opinions are considered helpful to the court . because a defendant , litigant , or other person emotional , behavioral , or cognitive functioning can be at issue in a variety of legal proceedings , psychologists find themselves evaluating and testifying about the functioning of persons in many different legal matters . in criminal proceedings , psychologists may evaluate defendants when there are questions about their competence to proceed , criminal responsibility , and treatment needs for consideration at the time of sentencing . in civil proceedings , psychologists can evaluate litigants and others when there are questions about their capacity to parent , manage their personal and financial affairs , execute a will , work , or make healthcare decisions , or when there are disputes about their emotional , behavioral , or cognitive functioning as it relates to their risk for harming themselves or others or an alleged wrong committed by a third party . in all of these cases , psychologists assess individuals in light of the parameters the law has established for the particular question being addressed in order to gather data and offer opinions that will be presented to the decision makers to assist them in reaching a more informed decision in the matter .in some cases , psychologists can be of assistance to attorneys and the court by conducting and presenting the results of research that addresses important points of contention in litigation . although the kind of questions that are asked and the type of research that is conducted can vary dramatically , common to this work is that the research was conducted in the context of the litigation at hand and designed to answer some casespecific questions.in their influential treatise , walker and monahan described the products of this research as social fact testimony . for example , often in dispute in patent and trademark litigation is the issue of consumer confusion about competing products . in these cases , such as recent legal disputes regarding the apple and samsung wireless phones , one company alleges that another is unfairly encroaching on a unique aspect of its product that results in consumer confusion and/or harms the company economically . in zippo manufacturing rogers imports , the zippo lighter company argued that a competitor rogers imports copied the design of its cigarette lighter in such a way that it violated its trademark , caused consumers to confuse the two brands , and resulted in decreased zippo sales and income . in support of its claim , zippo presented results of research conducted expressly for purposes of the litigation , in which participants who were presented with both lighters demonstrated confusion about the brands . the results and interpretation of these data were offered by zippo manufacturing in support of its ultimately successful claim that consumer confusion resulted from the trademarked design similarities . psychologists also conduct research to inform legal decision makers about the knowledge and attitudes members of a jury pool have about a case that is about to go to trial , so as to inform decisions about whether an unbiased jury can be empaneled or whether a change in venue is necessary . such jury venire research , which is conducted in both criminal and civil proceedings , involves developing and administering surveys that query potential members of the jury pool about their knowledge and attitudes concerning the case at hand . psychologists who conduct this research may be called to testify about their findings , thereby providing the court with information about the jury pool that it would not otherwise have , to allow it to make a more informed decision about potential jurors knowledge of case matters and the potential need for a change in venue.psychologists can also assist legal decision makers and legislative bodies by providing observations and expert opinions about more general matters that are nonetheless of interest to the court or legislature . walker and monahan referred to this as social authority testimony . in litigation contexts , psychologists typically testify about research that sheds light on some matter or an assumption that is relevant to the case at hand , but they typically do not offer opinions about specific case matters . for example , a psychologist knowledgeable about research regarding eyewitnesses might be called to testify and educate a jury in a criminal proceeding about the poor relationship between eyewitness confidence and eyewitness accuracy , or how crime witnesses tend to focus on weapons that are brandished and pay less attention to the perpetrator and his or her appearance . or , in a child abuse prosecution , a psychologist knowledgeable about sexual victimization of children might educate the jury about why child victims of sexual abuse do not always come forward immediately to report the abuse or identify the perpetrator . social authority testimony is also introduced in legislative hearings , to inform lawmakers about psychological phenomena that are relevant to pending legislation . thus , a psychologist knowledgeable about limitations in how adolescents understand and exercise their constitutional rights while in custody might testify before a legislative body that is considering a law mandating that minors be appointed counsel in delinquency proceedings , whereas a psychologist knowledgeable about the relationship between watching violence on television and aggressive behavior of children might offer expert testimony to a body considering legislation limiting what is broadcast on television during daytime hours . psychologists conduct research that examines the legal system and its operation , and their findings can provide direction that is of considerable value . this research is quite varied in nature and focuses on phenomena as disparate as the effectiveness of various legal interventions or programs , the prevalence and characteristics of various phenomena , and the operation of the legal system more generally . what unifies this type of research is its focus on understanding and improving the legal system and its potential to provide important information to those who fashion policy and make laws that shape the legal system and its operation.as an example , in their program of research , redlich and her colleagues have examined the outcomes associated with special mental health courts designed to respond to criminal defendants whose involvement with the criminal justice system is related to their problems with severe and persistent mental illness . peters and his colleagues , in a similar line of research , examined the efficacy of courts devoted to managing the special challenges of offenders with substance abuse problems . finally , in a very different line of research , kovera and her colleagues examined the impact of expert testimony on the legal decision making of judges and jurors . as the information just presented demonstrates , the roles of forensic psychologists in these contexts can be broad and varied . at a micro level , their work can involve conducting and reporting the results of psychological assessments or conducting casespecific research , both with the intent of providing caserelevant knowledge to the legal decision maker that it would not otherwise have , so that more informed and better decisions are made . at the other end of the spectrum the macro level psychologists can help policy makers , legislators , and decision makers better understand the need for or potential impact of proposed legislation or the legal system and its operation . common to their involvement in all matters , however , is the fact that psychologists are relying on their expertise to provide helpful information that would otherwise not be available to legal decision makers . we turn next to a discussion of the role that forensic psychologists play in assisting specific legal actors . given that forensic psychology involves the application of psychology to the legal system , it is not surprising that much of the work of forensic psychologists involves assisting specific legal actors . in this section , we discuss the different ways in which forensic psychologists may assist law enforcement agencies , attorneys , litigants and others . within the area of policing and law enforcement , psychologists may play a variety of roles . a large body of research exists that establishes psychologists potential to assess law enforcement officers in matters of investigation and interrogation . once a crime is reported , law enforcement officials conduct an investigation to establish whether a crime has in fact been committed , whether it can be solved , and whether they can obtain evidence to facilitate a prosecution . at the level of investigation , a number of popular books , television shows , and movies depict criminal profilers . james brussel , a psychiatrist who began consulting to the new york city police department in the nineteen fifties , described the first case in which he was asked to assist the police . the mad bomber of new york detonated more than twenty bombs in theaters , transportation terminals , libraries , and offices around new york city for sixteen years during the nineteen forties and nineteen fifties . despite notes and letters mailed to them by the bomber , the police were at a loss to identify a suspect and eventually consulted brussel , who examined the evidence the police had collected , including the notes , letters , and photographs and details of the crime scenes . brussel developed a precise criminal profile of the bomber , which turned out to closely match the characteristics of the man the police eventually apprehended and prosecuted . since that time , the field of criminal profiling has developed . of course , in many cases , the efforts of psychologists and psychiatrists have not been so successful , and there remains concern that criminal profiling is nothing more than socalled smoke and mirrors . in reality , most criminal profilers are police officers , but forensic psychologists sometimes are called on to assist with investigations . over time , investigative psychology and offender profiling have developed into an area of forensic psychology with an empirical base , and modern approaches to offender profiling are far removed from the early speculative approaches that are still so often depicted in television and film . psychologists have also conducted research to investigate the efficacy of police interviews and assist police with interviewing witnesses and suspects , including child victims and witnesses . this work assists police in developing interviewing skills for use with witnesses and suspects that will maximize the amount of accurate information that is obtained and minimize bias and error . in addition to direct involvement with police with respect to conducting investigations and questioning witnesses and suspects , psychologists are involved in a range of other activities . psychologists may be called on to assist the police in their interactions with persons with mental disorders . a great deal of work has also been done to assist law enforcement agencies with respect to screening , selection , and recruitment of police candidates and providing critical mental health services to sworn officers and their families . we now turn to a brief review of the roles psychologists play in assisting attorneys . psychologists frequently provide consultation to attorneys with respect to case formulation and jury matters . to this end , some psychologists assist attorneys in conceptualizing and presenting cases in a way that will be most advantageous to their clients . moreover , a growing area of study focuses on the psychology of the jury , in which psychologists assist attorneys by developing strategies for selecting and working with juries . indeed , the area of psychological trial consulting and scientific jury selection has grown significantly over the past two decades . psychologists can assist attorneys by helping them conceptualize their case in a way that will be most compelling for the jury . trial consultants argue that , because attorneys develop specialized legal knowledge , they may not be able to conceptualize cases or present them in a way that will be best understood by the jury . research shows that jurors use a socalled story model to assist them to make sense of the facts presented at trial . according to this model , after hearing the evidence at trial and being provided the legal instructions by the judge at the end of the trial , jurors attempt to find the best match between the arguments made by the competing attorneys and the verdict options . to this end , it is important that attorneys conceptualize and explain the case in a way that the jury understands and that will best fit the verdict option that suits their clients . relying on general decisionmaking research and surveys or questionnaires that may be developed for the case at hand , psychologists can assist attorneys by helping them understand how jurors may make sense of and consider the evidence and crafting their arguments accordingly . more recently , psychologists acting as trial consultants have begun to assist attorneys in presenting the information to the jury using modern technology to maximize the effectiveness of their arguments . beyond assisting attorneys in conceptualizing the case and presenting information to jurors in the most compelling manner , psychologists may assist attorneys with jury selection . in the united states , the jury is selected in a process known as the voir dire , during which potential jurors are questioned by the judge or attorneys in order to ensure that a fair and impartial jury is empaneled . as such , jurors may be challenged for cause in cases where it is determined that a juror has preexisting beliefs that would prevent him or her from making a decision in the case based solely on the evidence presented . in addition to challenges for cause , attorneys may challenge a designated number of prospective jurors in each case without providing a justification . with peremptory challenges , prospective jurors may be excluded without a reason stated , without inquiry , and without being subject to the court control . when empaneling a jury , attorneys may rely on forensic psychologists to assist them in selecting the most desirable jurors and deselecting the least desirable jurors . typically , psychologists survey members of the community about matters pertaining to a case in order to identify those characteristics that relate attitudes about the case and case outcomes . consultants may also use focus groups to obtain additional information about the views of people regarding matters at issue in the particular case and how prospective jurors may respond to different arguments . based on the results of the surveys , psychologists can help identify the characteristics of people who would be more or less likely to make a decision in favor of their client . then , during voir dire , potential jurors would be asked a series of questions designed to identify sympathetic and unsympathetic jurors . research shows that , without assistance , attorneys may not be very skilled at identifying jurors who might be biased against their clients . although the empirical evidence shows an increased likelihood that jurors will find in favor of the side that employs jury consultants , the results vary across studies and in actual cases particularly since both sides may use consultants . in addition to the strategies just outlined , psychologists who work as jury consultants sometimes employ mock or shadow juries . the use of mock juries involves bringing a group of jury eligible people together , presenting them with case information in order to determine how various arguments and presentations affect their thinking and decision making , and shaping the case presentation accordingly . the complexity and sophistication of mock juries can vary from providing the participants with a summary of information about the case to actually having attorneys present their arguments in a mock trial format . finally , during the course of the trial , jury consultants sometimes employ shadow jurors who sit in the courtroom throughout the trial , listen to the arguments and evidence , and provide the consultant with their perceptions and opinions as the trial proceeds . the attorneys then use this information to shape their subsequent presentations and strategies . assisting litigants and others . with respect to assisting litigants and others in the legal system , psychologists act in quasijudicial capacities and also provide therapeutic services . quasijudicial roles . over the past quarter of a century , psychologists have become increasingly involved in a number of activities in which they serve as decision makers for persons involved in the legal process . psychologists involvement in such activities is presumably predicated upon assumptions that their interpersonal skills provide them with abilities that will facilitate examination and settling of disputes . a number of these activities are presented next . mediation . in some jurisdictions , psychologists can serve as legally recognized mediators , in which they function in a quasijudicial role . mediation is a dispute resolution process that helps persons involved in legal disputes avoid the adversarial process and courtroom litigation . although there is considerable variability across jurisdictions and contexts , mediation at the most general level involves a neutral person who works with parties to a dispute in order to craft an agreement that is acceptable to them , with the understanding that a return to traditional litigation channels will occur if such an agreement can not be reached . unlike many if not most litigants , parents in custody disputes must have continued contact with each other involving matters of their minor children after the court hearing their dispute has rendered a judgment . thus , mediation proponents argue that it can be of particular value in divorce and custody proceedings because of its potential to diminish some of the acrimony and emotion that is associated with the adversarial process . proponents of using mediation in cases of contested custody argue that it has the potential to facilitate settlement of a large number of cases headed for court , speed litigation times , decrease litigation costs , increase compliance with custody agreements , and improve family relationships , including the relationship that the divorcing or separating parents have with each other and their children . some , however , have questioned the value of mediation in matters of divorce and custody . in two thousand and five , the afcc an interdisciplinary organization of attorneys , mental health professionals , social service professionals , and accountants published the model standards of practice for family and divorce mediation , which serve as a guide for the conduct of family mediators , educate service recipients about the mediation process and what to expect , and promote public confidence in mediation as a family dispute resolution process . parent coordination . over the past fifteen to twenty years , psychologists and other mental health professionals have taken on a new role in family court proceedings of parent coordinator or special master . according to the apa , parent coordination is a nonadversarial dispute resolution process that is court ordered or agreed on by divorced and separated parents who have an ongoing pattern of high conflict and/or litigation about their children . is designed to help parents implement and comply with court orders or parenting plans , to make timely decisions in a manner consistent with children developmental and psychological needs , to reduce the amount of damaging conflict between caretaking adults to which children are exposed , and to diminish the pattern of unnecessary relitigation about childrelated issues . parent coordinators typically are appointed only in the most challenging cases involving divorced parents who experience enduring high conflict surrounding the caretaking of their children . parent coordinators generally have responsibility for resolving ongoing and day-to-day disputes that may develop , while the court retains the right to rule on more significant matters . all commentators agree that serving as a parent coordinator is particularly challenging , given the level of conflict that is inherent to all cases , the hybrid role that is assumed by the professional , and the myriad regulatory and professional bodies that might consider the work of the professional . not surprisingly , the legal authority for parent coordinators , their rights , and their responsibilities varies across jurisdictions . recently , however , at least two organizations have provided important direction to psychologists serving in this role by publishing practice guidelines . in two thousand and five , the afcc published the guidelines for parenting coordination , the purpose of which is to provide direction to professionals , jurisdictions , and educational institutions regarding appropriate parent coordinator practice ; the parent coordinator ethical obligations ; and educational , training , and experience qualifications for parent coordinators . similarly , in two thousand and twelve , the apa published the guidelines for the practice of parenting coordination , the purpose of which is to describe best practices for ethical and competent functioning in this unique role . much of the work of psychologists in the legal system involves treating those within it , including victims and offenders . crime victims . by definition , virtually every crime has a victim . research and clinical experience show that crime victims can experience a range of physical and psychological responses to the event , ranging from transient distress and discomfort to more enduring mental disorders , such as posttraumatic stress disorder . working with victims is a growth area within forensic psychology . indeed , all states in the united states have enacted crime victim legislation , most of which provides for funding of mental health treatment services . despite the stark reality of the large number of crime victims at any point in time , with the exception of work focusing on victims of interpersonal violence , rape and sexual assault , and child abuse , surprisingly little psychological research exists regarding the impact that offending has on victims more generally . that we know so little about the efficacy of interventions designed to assist victims responses to and manage adverse psychological outcomes is particularly surprising given the ubiquitousness of criminal victimization in our society . accordingly , it is important that greater attention be paid to evidencebased approaches that aim to assist victims of crime . much of the work of forensic psychologists involves assessment and treatment of offenders . an expanding body of empirical literature demonstrates that offender rehabilitation can significantly reduce recidivism . contemporary approaches to offender rehabilitation have been drawn from the psychology of criminal conduct and the risk needs responsivity principles that are derived from the model . the pcc , which was developed by andrews and bonta in the nineteen eighties and refined over time , is a theory concerned with individual differences in criminal behavior , making it a particularly useful guide both for assessing the risk of recidivism and for planning rehabilitation attempts . the pcc provides directions for the assessment and treatment of offenders that are embodied in the principles of rnr . the risk principle directs that the degree of intensity of treatment programs for offenders must be matched to an offender level of risk . therefore , more intensive intervention is provided to those assessed as being a high risk for reoffending . conversely , lowerrisk offenders have been shown to derive better outcomes from a less intensive level of service and intervention . the needs principle posits that , to reduce recidivism , treatment must focus on the offender criminogenic needs . the responsivity principle considers factors that may affect or even impede an offender response to interventions . two general types of factors affect responsivity . one involves factors internal to the individual including , for example , intellectual functioning , selfesteem , and motivation level . a second type involves external factors such as staff characteristics , therapeutic relationships , environmental support , and program content and delivery . taken together , offender rehabilitation programs that are based on the rnr principles have been found to significantly reduce reoffense rates among offenders . the pcc and the development of the rnr model have formed the basis for many of the gains made in offender rehabilitation . using these principles , rates of reoffending can be reduced by as much as thirty percent across different types of offenders . psychologists researching psychological matters of particular interest to the legal system . in addition to researching the legal system and its functioning , psychologists conduct research on a multitude of psychological factors or phenomena that are of particular interest to the legal system . some of these areas of inquiry are discussed next . some psychological phenomena are of particular interest to the legal system given their nature , and research psychologists have made considerable contributions in these areas . because identification of the accused by eyewitnesses is integral to many convictions , understanding how accurate eyewitnesses are and what factors may affect their recollections is highly important . not surprisingly , a voluminous literature examines this issue , most of which has been produced by experimental and social psychologists . similarly , factors associated with increased suggestiblilty of child witnesses and strategies that can be employed to increase accuracy of their accounts are of great import to the legal system . in response , research psychologists have made great contributions in this area as well . as a final example , psychopathy defined as a constellation of affective , interpersonal and behavioral characteristics , including egocentricity , impulsivity , irresponsibility , shallow emotions , lack of empathy , guilt , or remorse ; pathological lying ; manipulativeness ; and the persistent violation of social norms and expectations is of particular interest to the legal system , given the high rates of persistent offending displayed by persons with this disorder . a great deal of research literature has been compiled by clinical and experimental psychologists examining the causes , correlates , manifestations , assessment , and treatment of psychopathy . many legal issues involve matters of psychology . these are typically referred to as psycholegal capacities . understanding the nature of these psycholegal capacities is important to both the legal system and the mental health professionals who may be called on to assess persons when such capacities are at issue . in addition , psychologists researching these matters have devoted considerable efforts to defining the nature of these capacities . when evaluating psycholegal capacities , psychologists employ a variety of tools and techniques , some of which are used in more traditional settings that psychologists work in and some of which have been developed for use in forensic settings . these assessment tasks are either descriptive or predictive . integral to understanding the potential value and accuracy of such evaluations is research that operationalizes these psycholegal capacities and examines the utility of various techniques and instruments that are designed to assess them . only if research findings indicating that psychologists have some special abilities in understanding these issues are psychologists justified as entering the courts as experts and the courts justified in hearing psychologists testimony . thus , psychologists conduct research examining the utility of various assessment tools and approaches that have been developed to describe psycholegal constructs or inform predictions of behaviors of interest . another common forensic evaluation task involves prediction . predictive evaluations require the psychologist to comment on the likelihood of some future event . in an attempt to identify the causes of violent behavior , a psychologist might investigate its emotional , behavioral , and cognitive correlates and the efficacy of various treatments and interventions . alternatively , psychologists might conduct research examining the accuracy of a test or tool that has been designed to inform mental health professionals judgments about such risk . in both cases , the psychologist is conducting research relevant to an important issue of concern to courts : competence to stand trial or violence risk assessment and intervention.there is no uniform or consensual definition of forensic psychology , and it is clear that psychologists make contributions to the legal system in a multitude of ways . hugo munsterberg , the first and perhaps most ardent proponent of what psychology had to offer the legal system , recognized this more than a century ago . in his one thousand, nine hundred and eight treatise , on the witness stand , munsterberg discussed a variety of ways in which psychologists could contribute to legal proceedings , with chapters devoted to phenomena as varied as lie detection , eyewitness memory , false confessions , and crime prevention . munsterberg s early work was widely castigated , and he could not have fathomed the success and growth the field has seen over the past century . in the century that has passed since munsterberg s book , psychologists have become involved with the legal process and provided assistance to the legal system a multitude of ways , providing assistance to the courts in decision making , researching matters of interest to the legal system , and offering services to persons involved with the legal system . as the information in this chapter shows , the roles that forensic psychologists play are broad and varied , with some areas being far more developed than others . the reason that forensic psychology , as a field , is broad and diverse is that it reflects the breadth and diversity of the law . as such , we can expect an expanding array of topics in law with which psychology can contribute on both the micro and macro levels . 