assessing violence risk . in a variety of contexts , our legal system allows for or requires assessments of risk for violence of certain individuals . that is , the law requires assessments of the risk that those individuals will cause certain types of harm under particular conditions within particular periods of time . such assessments , currently most commonly labeled violence risk assessments , can significantly affect the lives of those individuals and , if a serious proclivity toward violence goes undetected , perhaps others that is , potential victims as well . mental health professionals are often called on , and may even be obliged , to participate in these decisions . although the flurry of foundational riskrelevant legal activity waned to some extent in north america throughout the nineteen eighties and nineteen nineties , if one looks globally , there is no shortage of the enshrinement of risk within law and policy . this chapter addresses violence risk assessments , historically referred to as assessments of dangerousness , concerning mentally or personality disordered individuals possibly at risk for violence in the community . first , we review some of the landmark commentary , case law , and research that spurred the proliferation of risk assessment research and professional activity . we then review the major approaches to risk assessment , their advantages and disadvantages , and corresponding research . then we provide a step by step overview of the clinical risk assessment process . next , we survey recent developments in the law that concern the admissibility in court of such assessments and the legal standards for depriving individuals of their liberty based on such assessments . we conclude by recommending several fruitful areas for research and practice concerning violence risk assessment to tackle . landmark early research and commentary . the first comprehensive review of the research literature regarding assessments of dangerousness by mental health professionals was john monahan influential monograph predicting violent behavior : an assessment of clinical techniques , which appeared in nineteen eighty one . monahan updated his nineteen eighty one review in another prominent article published in nineteen eighty four . litwack and schlesinger reviewed the research literature through nineteen eighty five for the first edition of the present volume and arrived at conclusions somewhat different from those of monahan . litwack , kirschner , and wack reviewed the relevant studies from nineteen eighty five to nineteen ninety and concluded , echoing both monahan and litwack and schlesinger , that research had not negated the possibility that clinical evaluations of dangerousness can have a unique and useful role to play in making determinations of dangerousness that our society has decided should be made . litwack and schlesinger updated their review of the literature for the second edition of this handbook and echoed this sentiment . however , in nineteen ninety nine , quinsey , harris , rice , and cormier proposed the complete replacement of clinical assessments of dangerousness with actuarial methods . in response , litwack reviewed the studies directly comparing clinical with actuarial risk assessments and concluded that research to date has not demonstrated that actuarial methods of risk assessment are superior to clinical methods . rather , he proposed , it seems that much more research is needed to determine the relative merits of clinical versus actuarial assessments of dangerousness and that such research should be conducted in as meaningful a manner as possible . here we review some of the most prominent early studies of violence risk assessment both because of their continuing notoriety and because they illustrate important points that should be considered in evaluating most research studies regarding assessments of dangerousness and the assessments themselves . then we consider major research studies published in recent years to evaluate the current state of research findings concerning violence risk assessments . the most widely cited study for the often stated proposition that predictions of violence by mental health professionals are wrong at least two times out of three , even when based on a known history of violence and extensive clinical examinations , is a study by kozol , boucher and garofalo . a close examination of this study illustrates , however , how cautious one should be before drawing firm conclusions from many early studies of assessments of dangerousness . using clinical examinations , extensive life histories , and psychological tests , a team of mental health professionals evaluated five hundred and ninety two males convicted of assaultive offenses and sentenced to a special facility for continued evaluation and treatment . of these men , three hundred and eighty six were eventually classified as not dangerous by the evaluating team and released . in addition , forty nine men classified as still dangerous were also released by legal authorities against the advice of the professional staff . during a five year community follow up , eight percent of the patients considered by the evaluating teams to be not dangerous were found to have committed a serious assaultive crime . by contrast , thirty five percent of the patients viewed as dangerous by clinicians , but nevertheless released , were discovered to have committed a serious crime . on the surface , the clinicians studied here did appear to do much better than chance in their evaluations because the recidivism rate of offender patients released against the advice of the evaluating teams was much higher than the recidivism rate of patients evaluated to be no longer dangerous . however , it appears from the report that the examinees deemed dangerous but nevertheless released were , on average , at risk for recidivism in the community for a significantly longer period than those released after clinical judgments of nondangerousness . thus , it can not be definitively concluded from this study that the clinicians at issue demonstrated at least some ability to assess dangerousness . however , for the reasons that follow , neither should it be concluded from this study that predictions of violence by mental health professionals are wrong at least two thirds of the time . to begin with , kozol , boucher , and garofalo reported subsequently that at least fourteen of their forty nine patients classified as dangerous and yet released were patients who had been committed and studied during the early years of their program and who would not have been considered to be dangerous in the later years of their study . thus , kozol eventually may have developed an assessment system that was able to predict which of their sample of patients would be dangerous if released with at least fifty percent accuracy . second , the recidivism rate reported by kozol for the patients deemed dangerous whether thirty five percent or fifty percent was presumably lower than the actual recidivism rate . hall has pointed out that there is good reason to believe that only twenty percent of serious crimes lead to an arrest . thus , many seeming false positives may , in fact , be undiscovered true positives . third , the forty nine patients released despite clinical judgments of dangerousness were not a representative sample of patients judged to be dangerous by the clinicians in this study . because these forty nine individuals were released by judicial or parole authorities against professional advice , they were almost certainly patients whose dangerousness was in fact uncertain . why else , in the main , would they have been released ? however , if the far larger number of patients classified as dangerous by the teams and legal authorities and not released had been released , their rate of recidivism and the apparent accuracy of the clinical assessments might have been far higher than it appeared to be for the patients whose dangerousness was questionable . thus , this study simply does not demonstrate that predictions of violence by mental health professionals are likely to be wrong two thirds of the time , regardless of the sample of individuals being evaluated , the circumstances involved , or the confidence of the clinicians in their judgments . finally , and most important , the judgments of dangerousness at issue in this study , like most judgments of dangerousness , were never predictions of violence to begin with . the patients supposedly predicted to be violent were actually , and more conservatively , not recommended for release . clinical concerns regarding a patient potential dangerousness that lead to a conclusion that the patient can not be recommended for release do not equate with a prediction that a patient will be violent if released . a clinical judgment that a patient is dangerous , even a judgment that an individual is sufficiently dangerous to warrant confinement , is rarely , if ever , a prediction that a patient unquestionably will be violent if at liberty or , at least , if unsupervised . rather , almost always , it is a judgment that the subject poses a significant risk of acting violently in certain circumstances . indeed , in forensic settings , patients with a history of serious violence may well be deemed a continued danger by clinicians and judges even if it clearly could not be concluded with confidence that those patients would recidivate if released , as long as it is determined that the patients are still significantly at risk for serious recidivism . that is , a clinical conclusion that a patient can not be recommended for release or even a conclusion that a patient remains dangerous may simply be a determination that the patient remains prone to violence under certain circumstances . violence may or may not actually occur , depending on the totality of the clinical picture . thus , if a patient deemed by a clinician to be too dangerous to be recommended for release is nevertheless released and does not recidivate , it is incorrect to conclude that the clinician made an inaccurate prediction . to the contrary , although the clinician may have concluded that the risk of causing harm still posed by the patient was too great to recommend the patient for release , the clinician may also have concluded that the patient might well not recidivate . this fact poses serious difficulties for attempts to evaluate the validity of clinical assessments of dangerousness or the relative merits of clinical versus actuarial assessments . baxstrom and dixon studies . other historically important studies of violence risk assessments by mental health professionals are the wellknown baxstrom studies and the similar study of the dixon patients by thornberry and jacoby . briefly stated , these studies concerned hundreds of individuals confined for many years in forensic hospitals because they were considered to be too dangerous to be released to civil hospitals , much less to the community . yet , as a result of judicial decisions , these patients were nevertheless transferred to civil hospitals . follow up studies indicated that only a small percentage had to be returned to secure facilities and only a small number of patients ultimately released to the community were rearrested for violent offenses . these findings indicate that , in the past , many mentally ill individuals were wrongfully confined in unduly restrictive facilities because of erroneous assumptions that they were too dangerous to live in less restrictive conditions ; therefore , determinations of dangerousness for the purpose of preventive detention warrant careful judicial scrutiny . but it is equally clear that the determinations of dangerousness on which the unnecessarily severe confinements were grounded were not based on careful , individualized assessments but on what have been described as administrative decisions , global assessments , and political predictions . nor is there any evidence that the psychiatrists who made those determinations were anything like a representative sample of psychiatrists . indeed , given the fact that many of these patients had grown old , it is hard to believe that a representative sample of mental health professionals would have determined so many of them to be seriously dangerous . indeed , litwack described a representative sample of patients confined on the grounds of dangerousness in a secure forensic facility and compared his sample to thornberry and jacoby sample . litwack concluded that the samples and assessment techniques employed were so different that the validity , or invalidity , of the predictions of dangerousness at issue in the study of the dixon patients utterly irrelevant to evaluating the validity and legitimacy of the assessments of dangerousness he surveyed . moreover , litwack pointed out , once even a semblance of an individualized examination was performed . on the dixon patients , only a distinct minority were still deemed to be dangerous . in short , it is wrong to draw conclusions about assessments of dangerousness in other much less all circumstances from findings regarding such assessments in particular circumstances . these few studies , spurred in large part by legal decisions , are foundational within the violence risk assessment field . they raised alarm bells among the legal and mental health professions in terms of the supposed inability of mental health professionals to predict violence . despite drawing harsh conclusions about clinical ineptitude based on less-than-optimal data or actual clinical risk assessments , these few studies , perhaps ironically , are likely the reason that the contemporary risk assessment field has received as much attention as it has . we now shift our attention to more contemporary themes . contemporary models of violence risk assessment . although unstructured clinical prediction still may be the most common approach to risk assessment , generally , as described here , it is not a model of risk assessment per se . in terms of specific , defined models , two primary contemporary models of violence risk assessment are commonly used in applied settings : actuarial and structured professional judgment . there has been a vast amount of research on these models , particularly spj , since the previous edition of this volume . the actuarial method is rooted in the classic human decision making debate between clinical prediction and actuarial prediction . as we reviewed earlier , correctly or otherwise , much of the early research on violence risk assessment or dangerousness led investigators to conclude that clinical predictions by mental health professionals were poor . research on actuarial risk assessment was spurred by these dismal conclusions . and , in part , spj arose out of perceived weaknesses in the unstructured clinical and actuarial approaches . next we review these approaches , including their primary features and their pros and cons . following that , we review research addressing their validity . clinical judgment . unstructured clinical judgment is not a model of risk assessment per se . in fact , it was described by meehl as an approach that lacks rules . it is based on professional opinion , experience , and intuition , and clinicians have absolute discretion in terms of the risk factors they rely on and how to integrate them . as grove and meehl wrote , clinical prediction is an informal , in the head , impressionistic , subjective conclusion , reached by a human clinical judge . although we believe that clinical experience is essential for conducting risk assessments , we also believe that exercising such experience within a structured decision making context is necessary . although the traditional definition of clinical prediction stressed the absence of rules and the unfettered application of unchecked intuition , clinicians may and do take into account whatever available data they deem relevant to their assessments , including data that can be obtained only through clinical methods . thus , although clinicians undoubtedly vary in their knowledge of which factors to consider when evaluating dangerousness and in their ability to properly assess and weigh those factors , we in fact do not accept the notion , suggested by others , that clinical judgments are merely subjective or impressionistic . rather , as holt aptly noted decades ago , disciplined analytical judgment is generally better than global , diffuse judgment ; but it is not any the less clinical . despite these caveats , we address the unstructured clinical judgment model next . strengths and weaknesses of unstructured clinical discretion . using clinical judgment does have benefits , including being able to respond to rare or unusual circumstances and to important elements of the individual case . this fosters case conceptualization and individualized risk management plans . however , a purely unstructured approach has substantial weaknesses , given the absence of guidance to decision makers . for instance , clinicians may pay undue attention to factors that are not associated with violence . conversely , they may fail to attend to important factors that are indeed associated with violence . given a complete absence of structure , there may be inconsistency across raters as well as inconsistency within raters but across cases . therefore , over time , it is probable that use of this decision approach will produce decisions of lower reliability that are less strongly related to violence than a structured approach . guy metaanalysis , for instance , showed that unstructured approaches were significantly less strongly related to violence than were structured approaches . furthermore , from an ethical perspective , entirely unstructured approaches are problematic , because the final decision may rest on unspecified factors and processes . that is , there may be little transparency in unstructured clinical decision making , which poses problems in legal settings because such decisions can not adequately be reviewed . this places examinees rights , as well as continuity of care , at jeopardy . actuarial prediction . by contrast , the actuarial approach to prediction is a formal method that uses an equation , a formula , a graph , or an actuarial table to arrive at a probability , or expected value , of some outcome . the defining feature of the actuarial prediction method is the derivation and use of replicable , routinized rules for combining or integrating predictive factors . risk factors are selected because they are predictive of violence and are combined based on their joint predictive qualities in the derivation sample . major contemporary actuarial instruments are listed in table fourteen strengths and weaknesses of actuarial decision making . actuarial prediction methods may possess good reliability , because the methods for using their risk factors are explicit . this can also produce good predictive validity in comparison with unstructured approaches . in addition , the transparency of these methods is a benefit in legal contexts . the predictive properties of most actuarial risk assessment instruments tend to be optimized within a derivation sample . often only one sample is used , and the results may not be crossvalidated prior to use . this practice is highly problematic because derivation predictive estimates which are linked to the specific characteristics of unique samples tend to change upon crossvalidation in new samples . as such , actuarial risk assessment instruments produce estimated probabilities of violence over some future time for persons who fall into certain score ranges on the test . the actuarial approach has a number of vulnerabilities that have yet to be overcome in the risk assessment field . first , most actuarial instruments contain risk factors that were demonstrated to be predictive of violence in one sample . although this procedure does indeed demonstrate what variables were predictive in that given sample , there is no guarantee that the same variables will be predictive in other samples or that only those risk factors will be associated with violence in other samples . that is , given myriad sample characteristics , it is possible that actuarial instruments contain samplespecific risk factors and exclude important risk factors with broad support in the literature . strict actuarial approaches disallow consideration of risk factors not included on the instrument . these approaches presume that the original research considered all potentially relevant risk factors and all potentially relevant risk factors are contained on the instrument . moreover , if weighting of risk factors is involved , as it often is , the actuarial approach presumes that all risk factors would be weighted equivalently in different samples . further , attaching weights to risk factors presumes not only that they will apply equally across samples but that they apply equally to all persons within samples . that is , if , say , substance abuse receives a weight of twice that of psychopathy on some actuarial measure , the implied presumption is that substance abuse is twice as important as psychopathy for all persons to whom the instrument might be applied . this is a very high bar to set , and one that we do not think has been met in the risk assessment field . a major problem with the actuarial approach stems from its sample dependence . risk factors are selected through certain statistical procedures and given weights through one of any number of methods . as a result , the estimated probabilities of violence are all dependent on a host of samplespecific characteristics . these include , inter alia , the initial selection of candidate risk factors , how they were measured , how reliable their measurement was , sample size , length of followup , nature of the sample mix , definition of violence , and method of detecting violence . sample dependence means that estimated probabilities of violence may change if the instrument is used in new samples . therefore , actuarial estimates might not be stable across new samples and , unless demonstrated to be so , ought not be assumed to be so . indeed , the onus of demonstrating the stability lies on those who use actuarial methods . to further muddy the waters , it is unclear whether samplebased estimates should be applied to the individuals within those samples at all . hart , michie , and cooke calculated confidence intervals for the vrag and ninety nineatic99 at both the group level and the individual level . their argument was that , if precise actuarial estimates are used at the case level , they ought to be shown to possess meaningful precision at that level . their findings indicated that cis at the individual level were so broad as to render individual level prediction meaningless . although some commentators have taken issue with the calculation of cis at the individual level to start with , at the very least their work highlights the great difficulty of applying groupbased probability estimates to individual persons within those groups . we illustrate some of these problems . earlier we noted that one problem with actuarial methods is the exclusion of potentially important risk factors either because they were not included among the set of candidate variables in the first place or because they did not make it onto the final instrument in the given derivation sample . consider the static ninety nine , a widely used actuarial instrument for sexual violence risk assessment . it omits sexual deviation , even though this risk factor is related to violence across numerous samples . as another example , the vrag fails to contain various risk factors that have a good deal of empirical support , such as treatment noncompliance and anger . strictly speaking , from an actuarial perspective , this means that evaluators should not consider these risk factors , because they are not contained on the given instrument . in our view , this highly limits the scope and comprehensiveness of a risk assessment , to the extent that risk factors of potentially vital importance would not be considered by the decision maker . correlation was reduced from forty four4 in the development sample to thirty six6 in authorconducted crossvalidations and to thirty0 in independent samples . similar reductions were observed for the sorag and static ninety nine . although the blair metaanalysis focused on correlational effect sizes , the findings suggest that the frequency estimates produced by some actuarial instruments may not generalize either . mills , jones , and kroner tested the generalizability of such frequency estimates among two hundred and nine offenders using the vrag and the level of service inventory revised . they concluded that the results of this study do not support the generalizability of the original probabilities associated with the prediction bins , although the lsir bins performed much better than the vrag bins and that this study does not support the use of the initial validation probability bins of either instrument with our sample . they further found that for the vrag , there were probability reversals across its various categories , in which categories with higher estimates that should have had correspondingly higher observed recidivism rates actually produced lower recidivism rates . based on the foregoing , it does not appear that the promise of actuarial instruments has been realized . it is highly likely that persons who score higher compared to lower on these instruments are indeed at higher risk for future violence . research tells us as much . however , it is not clear that we are able to ascribe precise probability estimates at the level of the individual person as opposed to the level of the sample or population . some of the other criticisms of actuarial approaches concern their tenuous relevance to treatment and risk management , which are highly dependent on dynamic risk , or the ability of risk factors to change over time . although actuarial instruments are not inherently static , they tend to include mainly historical factors and do not emphasize repeated measurements to capture change as part of their prescribed use . we focus more on this issue next as we discuss the spj approach . structured professional judgment . the spj approach to violence risk assessment has been in development since the early to mid nineteen nineties . it developed , in part , to compensate for the weaknesses of both the unstructured clinical and the actuarial approaches . however , it also aims to retain some of the strengths of both approaches . having said that , it is not a combination of approaches , and it is not an adjustedactuarial approach . in general , spj attempts to retain some of the strengths of the clinical approach , such as its relevance to treatment and risk management and its utility in individual case formulation . in addition , like the actuarial approach , it aims to attain solid empirical evidence and to couch professional judgments within a structured context . examples of major spj instruments are provided in table fourteen next we briefly describe the main features of the spj approach . the later section on the clinical assessment of risk expands on the details of how to use it . all spj risk instruments use logical or rational item selection to select risk factors of relevance to the form of violence addressed by the particular spj measure . this approach fosters generalizability of risk assessments across applications as well as comprehensiveness of the set of risk factors on spj instruments . logical item selection is a process involving a thorough review of scientific , theoretical , and professional literatures on the topic of relevance and the selection of risk factors with broad support across a number of numerous samples and contexts . its purpose is to derive a set of risk factors that minimizes the likelihood that important risk factors are excluded from an assessment or that irrelevant factors are included . this approach is not sample dependent , and hence risk factors generalize across settings . this approach contrasts with the empirical item selection approach used by most actuarial methods , the weaknesses of which were outlined earlier . unlike an unstructured clinical approach , it also ensures that an a priori , standard set of risk factors is considered by all clinicians for any case . for reasons reviewed earlier when discussing the weaknesses of actuarial approaches , spj instruments do not use numeric score cutoffs to categorize people , nor do they use numeric probability or frequency estimates of future risk for violence . spj approaches require decision makers to classify individuals as low , moderate , or high risk depending on their perceived level of risk and the corresponding required degree or amount of intervention to dampen this risk . clinicians consider the number and relevance of risk factors that are present in a given case . high risk means that an examinee is considered high priority by the evaluator for receiving risk management or reduction interventions , without which the evaluator is confident that the examinee would commit a violent act . although some commentators have criticized the lack of a numerical assignment system , research shows that this decisionmaking system is as accurate as or more accurate than actuarial classification systems . spj approaches do not provide a priori weighting to risk factors , as most actuarial instruments do . that is , in most spj measures , all factors are judged to be present , absent , or partially possibly present . then , based on the given case , clinicians decide which risk factors are more versus less relevant in that case . there is no presumption , as there is in actuarial models , that all risk factors are related to violence in the same manner for all persons across all samples . decision makers consider the presence of risk factors that have empirical support at the nomothetic level as well as the risk factors individual relevance at the idiographic level . all spj violence risk instruments include dynamic risk factors . this fosters treatment and risk management planning . as described , the absence of dynamic risk is not an inherent property of actuarial instruments . however , most such instruments tend not to include an emphasis on dynamic risk , which limits their applicability to monitoring risk over time . the spj model helps clinicians decide how often to reevaluate risk factors and how to link risk assessment to risk management . all spj violence risk instruments contain numerous potentially changeable risk factors that inform clinicians judgments about what sort of risk reduction strategies are necessary in a given case . facilitation of risk management . comparative evaluative research . how do these approaches fare , both singly and comparatively , in terms of evaluating risk for violence ? in this section , we draw some conclusions from the literature on this topic . there are now hundreds of risk assessment studies especially on actuarial and spj approaches . after a review of landmark studies of unstructured clinical judgment , we focus on metaanalytic studies devoted to contemporary actuarial and spj instruments as well as illustrative comparative studies . for detailed commentary on early developmental research on key actuarial instruments such as the vrag and covr , please see the third edition of this handbook . landmark studies on clinical prediction . in nineteen ninety three , lidz , mulvey , and gardner published a study on clinical violence risk assessments that was deemed by monahan in nineteen ninety six to be , at that time , surely the most sophisticated study published on the clinical prediction of violence . the lidz study remains apposite , and we review it in some detail . in general , this research concluded that mental health professionals clinical judgments were significantly predictive of psychiatric patients violence . pairs of clinicians were asked to independently rate hundreds of psychiatric emergency department patients on a scale from one to five regarding the patients potential . violence toward others during the next six months . patients who received a summed rating of at least three out of a possible score of ten were included in the predicted violent group . each of these patients was then matched for sex , race , and age with another emergency room patient who had elicited less staff concern about future violence to others . ultimately , three hundred and fifty seven matched pairs were followed for six months after their discharge from the hospital . violent incidents were detected in thirty six percent of the comparison cases and fifty three percent of the predicted cases , a statistically significant difference . even when the patients preadmission history of violence was controlled for , the clinicians still did statistically better than chance , leading the authors to conclude that this study . show that clinical judgment has been undervalued in previous research . however , because a significant percentage of the patients who did act violently in the community were not identified as dangerous by the clinicians and because a considerable percentage of patients who did not act violently in the community were in the predicted violent group , the authors also concluded that the low sensitivity and specificity of these judgments show that clinicians are relatively inaccurate predictors of violence . furthermore , although this study showed that clinicians , generally , did better than chance at predicting violence , this was true only for male patients . prediction for female patients was no better than chance . clinicians underestimated the risk posed by women . although it was estimated to be about half that of men , in fact the men and women had similar base rates of violence in the followup period . and in a followup analysis of these data , coontz , lidz , and mulvey showed that clinicians spent much less time asking questions about violence to female patients compared to male patients who had recently been violent . moreover , in further followup analyses , gardner , lidz , mulvey , and shaw showed that a simple , threeitem actuarial screen outperformed clinicians decisions . thus , this study , considered one of the best to test clinicians predictions , showed lukewarm support for clinicians validity . the clinical predictions showed some association with violence but also showed a good deal of error , inapplicability for women , and inferior performance to a simple actuarial screen . despite the value of these lessons learned , there are other questions about what exactly can be drawn from this study . to begin with , the clinicians in this study were not predicting violence but instead rating their patients potential for violence . it is simply incorrect to conclude that a patient who elicited some clinical concern regarding future dangerousness has been predicted to be violent . lidz did find that patients about whom clinicians expressed serious concern those who had a summed score of six or above were no more likely to commit violence than patients regarding whom the clinicians had expressed some but less concern . however , a high clinical rating of potential violence does not necessarily mean a judgment that the patient is very likely to commit violence . such a concern may instead reflect a judgment that the patient is at risk for committing serious violence , even if the risk of occurrence is not high . that is , the concept of risk is not equivalent to the concept of probability or likelihood . according to the law as well as social science , the concept of risk includes consideration of the nature , severity , imminence , and frequency or duration of harm as well as its likelihood . thus , a clinical opinion of high risk could reflect a belief that the patient poses some significant possibility of serious violence , a high probability of minor violence , or a moderate probability of imminent violence . moreover , this study certainly does not demonstrate that psychiatric emergency room clinicians have sufficient ability to assess future dangerousness to justify emergency commitments based on their assessments of dangerousness . this is because the followup measures and analysis , however much a step forward from past efforts , did not assess a crucial variable : whether the patients violence in the community , when it occurred , was sufficiently serious and occurred sufficiently soon after their return to the community that would have justified continued confinement had it been foreseen . even if clinicians can do better than chance when they assess dangerousness , this is a far cry from concluding that they can assess dangerousness sufficiently well to justify depriving a person of liberty based on such an assessment . as is discussed in more detail later , clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness is required to justify an extended civil commitment . that a clinical determination of dangerousness can be shown to be likely to be somewhat better than a random judgment that is , better than chance does not render that judgment , in and of itself , clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness . to put it another way , statistical significance may not amount to legal significance . further , to have maximum legal utility , risk assessment methods should assess the risk of legally relevant possible violence that is , violence of legally relevant seriousness , likelihood and imminence , likelihood or imminence . furthermore , the comparison to the actuarial screen may not be entirely appropriate . these analyses compared actuarial and clinical predictions of violence for their accuracy in predicting any community violence versus predicting serious community violence . actuarial predictions had lower rates of falsepositive and falsenegative errors than the clinical predictions for any violence . however , the actuarial instruments were not superior to clinical judgments in predicting serious violence , which is the issue of practical concern . even more important , data regarding three of the most critical variables in the actuarial prediction equation were collected from patients not in the emergency room but in the community after their discharge from the hospital . these variables were the patient score on the hostility subscale of the brief symptom inventory , the patient recent history of drug abuse , and the patient recent history of violence . gardner , lidz , mulvey , and shaw reported that a simple decision tree relying on these three variables and age less than eighteen predicted future violence as well as a regressionbased method using these and other variables . however , it is questionable , at best , whether the data required for the decision tree could be validly and reliably collected in the emergency room , given patients clinical conditions at that time . at the least , therefore , this study did not convincingly demonstrate that actuarial methods are superior to clinical methods in determining which patients evaluated in psychiatric emergency rooms should or should not be hospitalized involuntarily . to the contrary , because the clinicians in gardner studies did as well as the actuarial scheme in predicting future serious violence , and because there is every reason to believe that the necessary actuarial data would not have been nearly as valid if collected in the emergency room if it could have been collected there at all there is every reason to suppose that clinicians are superior to actuarial methods in determining shortterm serious dangerousness regarding individuals brought for evaluation to psychiatric emergency rooms . in an early metaanalysis of sixty four prospective studies of predictors of violence among mentally disordered offenders , bonta , law , and hanson compared objective risk assessments to clinical judgment . objective assessments produced a relatively strong predictive effect and were considerably more strongly related to general recidivism than clinical judgment . a similar pattern was reported for violent recidivism . it should be noted that the objective risk assessments included very few of the major contemporary measures used today and also included studyspecific actuarial procedures that were not crossvalidated . nonetheless , this metaanalysis showed that , at least among mentally disordered offenders , clinical judgment was systematically less strongly related to future violence than actuarial approaches . campbell , french , and gendreau metaanalyzed eighty eight studies from between nineteen eighty and two thousand and six . their primary outcome variable was general recidivism among adults , although subanalyses focused on violent recidivism . instruments that had the largest number of evaluations were evaluated separately to facilitate crossinstrument comparison . the authors were able to do this for these instruments : psychopathy checklist revised ; statistical information on recidivism ; the vrag ; and the level of service family of instruments , which includes the original level of supervision inventory and its revisions , the lsir and the level of service case management inventory . in general , the cis overlapped for most instruments , meaning that no clear winner emerged . for institutional violence , effect sizes ranged from a low of eight to a high of twenty eight . for violent recidivism , they ranged from twenty two to thirty two . for violent recidivism , instruments that contained dynamic risk factors intending to focus on risk management and treatment produced larger effect sizes than those without such a focus . in the previously described metaanalysis by blair , the authors reported effect sizes for the vrag , sorag , and static ninety nine that were generally in the moderate range . however , there was a clear decrease in sizes of effects as one progressed from development samples , to instrument authorconducted studies employing crossvalidation samples , through independent crossvalidation samples . across all three instruments , correlational effect sizes decreased from thirty nine9 to thirty six6 to twenty eight8 . the primary point here is that one can expect the predictive accuracy of actuarial risk assessment instruments to decrease on crossvalidation . hanson and mortonbourgon evaluated one hundred and eighteen studies examining sex offender risk assessment . they classified assessments as actuarial , spj , and unstructured clinical prediction , and they classified outcomes as any , violent , and sexual . their main conclusion was that actuarial assessments were more accurate than unstructured clinical judgments for each type of outcome . spj measures were intermediate . actuarial estimates also tended to produce larger effect sizes than spj measures for sexual recidivism , although there were only six spj studies , and only three of these used summary risk ratings as opposed to the summation of scores . the single instrument with the largest effect sizes with sexual recidivism was the svr twenty , an spj measure , although this was based on only three studies . the authors advised that given the small number of spj studies , caution is warranted in evaluating spj instruments based on this particular metaanalysis . olver , stockdale , and wormith focused on three specific instruments for their metaanalysis of risk assessment of young offenders . one instrument the hare psychopathy checklist revised : youth version is not a risk assessment instrument per se , but they included it for comparative purposes , because psychopathy instruments are commonly used in risk assessment . the authors identified forty four usable studies and compared outcomes across general , violent , nonviolent , and sexual recidivism . none of the measures was specifically developed to assess the risk for sexual recidivism , and none performed well for this outcome . as with other metaanalyses , there were not large differences between measures , each performing comparably and moderately . more specifically , for the structured assessment of violence risk in youth , effect sizes ranged from thirty to thirty eight . for the youth level of service case management inventory , the range was twenty six to thirty two , and for the pcl yv , it was sixteen to twenty eight . in another metaanalysis focusing on young offenders , although specifically on sexual violence , viljoen , mordell , and beneteau again reported no meaningful differences between the four instruments they evaluated . across thirty three studies , effect sizes for sexual recidivism were in the small to moderate range . yang , wong , and coid were specifically interested in comparing individual measures in their metaanalysis of nine measures across twenty eight studies . they were also interested in focusing on contemporary instruments and using the pclr as a benchmark . that is , to what extent do measures improve on the pclr ? further , they investigated the extent to which study features versus specific instruments accounted for differences in predictive effects of instruments across studies . most instruments had moderate predictive validity , and there were few differences between instruments . only about twenty five percent of the variance in effect sizes was attributable to instruments , meaning that much of the difference between effect sizes was attributable to study design features . one standout finding was that the interpersonal aspects of the pclr were substantially less predictive compared to the risk assessment instruments and to the other features of the pclr . only two instruments , across various statistical models , added incremental validity to the pclr : the hcr twenty and the offender group reconviction scale . however , only two studies of the ogrs permitted this comparison , compared to sixteen for the hcr twenty . another , very focused , metaanalysis compared the hcr twenty and pclr in thirty four samples in which both instruments were included . although focused , this metaanalysis contains more hcr twenty comparisons than do other metaanalyses . the authors reported that , in general , the instruments performed the same . when the psychopathy item was removed from the hcr twenty , the instrument auc essentially remained unchanged . most interestingly , the authors secured seven raw data sets and were able to conduct head to head multivariate analyses of the hcr twenty and the pclr . the hcr twenty added unique , incremental validity beyond the pclr , whereas the converse was not true . specifically , using metaanalytic logistic regression , the authors reported that , with both instruments included in the analysis , for every one point increase on the hcr twenty , the probability of detecting violence increased twenty three percent , whereas for every onepoint increase on the pclr , the probability of detecting violence decreased by one percent . in yet another metaanalysis , the authors were interested in determining whether certain instruments were more accurate than others and whether features of study design impacted accuracy . across eighty eight independent studies published between nineteen ninety five and two thousand and eight , the authors evaluated nine instruments . although eighty eight studies were included in the metaanalysis , instrument specific analyses typically were based on no more than twelve studies and typically fewer than ten . also unlike most previous metaanalyses , they coded instruments into predictive bins of low versus high risk . for spj instruments , the analysis was based on the nonnumeric summary risk ratings of low , moderate , and high risk . for actuarial instruments , the authors similarly reduced the numeric score categories into two bins . unlike most previous metaanalyses , they argued that there were indeed differences between measures in terms of predictive accuracy . they reported that the savry produced the largest effect and the ls and pcl measures produced the smallest . the authors interpreted this finding to mean that instruments designed to assess risk in specific populations were more accurate than those designed for more general use or those not designed specifically for risk assessment . consistent with this interpretation , the authors also reported that instruments designed to predict violence fared better than those designed to predict general recidivism . this latter finding was also observed in a recent metaanalysis on an overlapping group of seventy three studies . in this latter metaanalysis , instruments designed to assess risk for violence , collapsed across actuarialspj assessment format , had superior predictive validity than did those instruments designed or used for general criminality , odds ratios of six versus two , respectively . it should be pointed out , however , that differences between the savry and the ls family of instruments are only somewhat meaningful , in that the savry was designed specifically for youth violence whereas the ls family spans youth and adulthood , and most studies were based on the adult ls measures . that is , generally , these differences in effect sizes do not compare instruments that would be used with the same populations . in terms of comparing spj and actuarial instruments , spj instruments produced diagnostic odds ratios that were larger than those for actuarial instruments , although these differences were not significant . most potential moderators were not significant , including gender , country , setting , and ethnicity , although there was a small trend for assessments to be more accurate among samples with a greater percentage of older , caucasian participants . regrettably , most risk assessment metaanalyses suffer the same flaw : they fail to include the summary risk ratings commonly used with the spj approach . singh is an exception , where they were able to use summary risk ratings for twenty two of twenty seven spj studies . the metaanalysis conducted by hanson and mortonbourgon also is an exception , although there were only three sex offender studies available for analysis that used summary risk ratings . although it is important to know how well spj instruments fare in terms of the sum of their risk factors , as a general indication of whether , in general , more risk factors equates to higher risk , this numeric index is not the one primarily intended to guide clinical practice . as discussed , raters are expected to come to decisions of low , moderate , or high risk based on their consideration of the number and relevance of risk factors and the expected degree of intervention required to reduce risk . in addition to singh , we are aware of only one broad metaanalysis that includes summary risk ratings . although it is unpublished at this time , we review it here , because it exhaustively metaanalyzed all spj literature . guy metaanalysis evaluated one hundred and thirteen spj disseminations and , where possible , compared these to actuarial and unstructured clinical prediction . focusing on spj studies , effect sizes did not differ as a function of gender , europe versus north america , adult versus adolescent , setting , institution versus community , file versus file+interview , or whether authors or translators were involved in the research . guy also compared the numeric use of spj instruments with the use of summary risk ratings . quite consistently , summary risk ratings were more strongly associated with violence relative to numeric use . similar to the findings of singh and fazel , guy reported that the hcr twenty summary risk ratings were more strongly related to outcomes when they focused on violence as opposed to nonviolent or general criminality . this was particularly the case for physical violence . across all available instruments and effect sizes , spj summary risk ratings produced larger effect sizes than actuarial instruments . for unstructured predictions , the effect sizes were on average smaller . based on one composite effect size per study , spj summary risk ratings and actuarial instruments were both stronger than unstructured predictions . in direct comparisons , summary risk ratings and actuarial predictions produced very similar effect sizes that did not differ significantly . three general observations about risk assessment metaanalytic research can be made . it is remarkable how many studies of contemporary risk assessment instruments have been conducted , even in the past ten years . metaanalyses should focus on instruments in the ways that they were intended to be used , as was done by guy , singh , and to a lesser extent hanson and mortonbourgon . most metaanalyses use selection criteria that remove a majority of studies that have been conducted on various instruments . for instance , there have been approximately one hundred studies on the predictive validity of the hcr twenty , yet in most metaanalyses only a small sampling of these studies is included . from a substantive perspective , four conclusions can be drawn . there is very little if any evidence that actuarial methods are more accurate than spj instruments , as is argued by some . indeed , one can fairly state based on metaanalytic evidence that professional , nonactuarial judgments , derived in an spj context , are as strongly or more strongly associated with violence than actuarial methods . there is some evidence that , when instruments are used with the specific outcomes that they were designed to predict , they perform better than when used with nonspecific outcomes . this was evident with the hcr twenty performing better with violence and physical violence than with general antisocial outcomes . instruments designed specifically to evaluate risk for violence seem to perform better than those designed or used to predict general criminal behavior . there is fairly clear evidence for validity shrinkage when using actuarial instruments . in this section , we review the studies that have evaluated the summary risk ratings of low , moderate , and high risk used in the spj approach , especially those that have compared them to the numeric use of such instruments or to actuarial instruments . we do so because this topic has only recently started to work its way into metaanalyses , and there remains less research on this use of the spj model relative to simply summing its risk factors . by our count , a total of thirty four published studies have investigated whether summary risk judgments are predictive of violence . of these thirty four studies , thirty support the use of final spj judgments in violence risk assessment , in that they were significantly predictive of violence . four studies did not find evidence of predictive validity of final spj judgments in predicting violence . in one of these studies that used one spj and three actuarial instruments , none of the instruments predicted violence . similarly , in schaap , none of the hcr twenty or pclr indices were predictive of either general or violent recidivism in this sample of forty five female forensic psychiatric patients . the hcr twenty summary risk ratings produced an auc of sixty five5 , suggesting that low power might have contributed to null findings . in braithewaite , the sample size was only thirty four . in a sample of one hundred and sixty nine male adolescent sex offenders in residential treatment , viljoen found that total savry scores were predictive of nonsexual violence in youth whereas final structured professional ratings were not . of note , the thirty four studies spanned multiple countries canada , denmark , finland , the netherlands , norway , portugal , serbia , spain , sweden , the united kingdom and the united states and included numerous different measures : early assessment risk list for boys ; estimate of risk of adolescent sexual offense recividism ; hcr twenty ; structured assessment of protective factors for violence risk ; sara ; savry ; short term assessment of risk and treatability ; start : adolescent version ; sexual violence risk twenty . as such , the finding that summary risk ratings are predictive of violence is robust and is so across country and instrument . of the published studies supporting the use of summary risk ratings , half have tested whether final spj judgments added incrementally to the prediction of violence over and above the numerical use of the instrument , or of a pcl measure , an actuarial measure , or unstructured clinical prediction . to test incremental validity , investigators typically use a multivariate regression approach in which the comparison index is entered in the first step of the model and the summary risk ratings are entered as the second step . the key outcome is whether the addition of the summary risk rating adds in a statistically significant manner to the predictive power of the multivariate model . in all but two of the seventeen studies , incremental validity was observed . for instance , hcr twenty summary risk ratings add incremental validity beyond the numeric use of the instrument among mentally disordered offenders , psychiatric inpatients , forensic patients , and criminal offenders released from prison or on probation or parole . a dutch measure modeled after and highly similar to the hcr twenty also showed incremental validity among forensic patients . the start summary risk rating showed incremental validity beyond its own numeric total among forensic psychiatric inpatients , although its adolescent version , the start : av , did not . incremental validity has been shown with the savry in three samples but not in two others . incremental validity of summary risk ratings has also been found with the earl twenty in six to twelve year old boys and the sara in a sample of adult domestic violence offenders . when compared to actuarial tools such as the vrag , the sorag and the static ninety nine , summary risk ratings of spj instruments tend to have better predictive utility for the outcome of interest . more important , researchers have investigated whether summary risk judgments add predictive validity above and beyond other instruments typically used for violence risk assessment . most such studies have found that summary risk ratings add incrementally to actuarial risk assessment tools . some studies using multivariate analyses have demonstrated that the hcr twenty summary risk judgment added incrementally to the pclr when used to predict violence in samples of criminal offenders and forensic patients . the start summary risk ratings have shown similar incremental validity beyond the screening version of the pcl sv , as have savry summary risk ratings beyond the pcl yv . douglas and colleagues found that the hcr twenty and the vrag both accounted for unique variance in predicting violence ; that is , they both added predictive power over the other . lodewijks , doreleijers showed that savry summary risk ratings possess incremental validity beyond unstructured clinical predictions , a finding consistent with guy metaanalytic finding that unstructured predictions were substantially less accurate than spj or actuarial methods . considering all of the empirical evidence , it appears safe to conclude that spj instruments , used in practice as intended , are as accurate as or more accurate than actuarial indices derived from their numeric use , than actuarial instruments , than unstructured clinical prediction , and than pcl instruments . furthermore , they do not suffer the same drawbacks as actuarial methods , discussed earlier . we now turn to a discussion of conducting clinical assessments of risk , with a focus on the steps laid out in the spj model . clinical evaluations of violence risk have been described and discussed for decades . there is good consensus that these evaluations comprise two distinct phases . the first step is to understand an examinee potential for violence . it involves systematic analysis of the examinee violence history , psychosocial adjustment more generally , and living situation . the goal is to understand what kinds of violence examinees might perpetrate , against which people , for which reasons , and under which circumstances . this is sometimes characterized as a process of prediction , although this is true only if the latter term is used loosely to mean understanding what might happen in the future rather than making precise , quantitative , probabilistic estimates of violence . the second step is to determine what events and occurrences might increase or decrease examinees potential for violence . it involves systematic analysis of possible future living situations , both with and without the influence of external agents , to identify putative controlling factors . the goal is to prevent future violence by developing a plan for intervention . this is sometimes characterized as a process of management . although these phases are conceptually distinct , there is some debate concerning whether they are independent or separable . some have argued in favor of this view . they see a simple , linear temporal relation between the two . professionals start by completing the assessment phase ; professionals start by completing the prediction phase ; then , if needed , they complete the management phase . commentators who hold this view believe that , in certain legal contexts , violence risk assessment requires only prediction that is , the only legally relevant issue is a subject potential for future violence whereas in other legal contexts , as well as all clinical contexts , it requires both prediction and management . others have argued that the relation between prediction and management is bidirectional or recursive . first professionals start the prediction phase ; but the prediction phase segues into the management phase , which may stimulate reiteration of the prediction and , in turn , management phases . according to this view , the prediction and management phases are flip sides of the same coin . each requires the other : good prediction is impossible without systematic consideration of the subject possible future living situations and interventions ; and , conversely , good management is impossible without systematic consideration of the potential for future violence . commentators with this perspective believe that the prediction phase is conditional or contingent on the management phase and that prediction is thus not legally relevant without consideration of management . regardless of how one conceptualizes or defines the process of evaluating violence risk , then , there seems to be unanimous agreement that comprehensive clinical evaluations incorporate both prediction and management . as unstructured clinical judgment by definition does not provide a welldefined framework for either prediction or management , actuarial decision making provides a framework only for prediction . in the remainder of this section we present a framework for comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk based on the spj approach . framework based on the spj approach . as discussed previously , the hallmark of the spj approach is that professionals use evidencebased guidelines to structure evaluations of violence risk , but their decisions rely on the exercise of discretion rather than strict adherence to a fixed and explicit algorithm developed a priori . in some respects , it is misleading to speak of an spj approach , as this gives the impression that there is a single , monolithic set of rules to which all those who develop or use spj guidelines adhere . the reality is that various guidelines have been developed by multiple groups working around the world over the past twenty years or so , each geared for different populations of subjects , different groups of users , and different forms of violence . yet these spj guidelines are consistent at the most broad or general level in positing that the task of comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk can be broken down into about six major steps : gather critical information . identify the presence of risk factors . evaluate the relevance of risk factors . develop scenarios of violence in light of risk factors that are present and relevant . develop management plans in light of scenarios of violence . communicate the evaluation findings . step one : gather critical information . as scott pointed out , before factors can be considered , they must be gathered . the quantity and quality of information reviewed by evaluators sets fundamental limits on the reliability and validity of their subsequent judgments . with respect to the quantity of information , evaluators should try to gather all the information that is necessary to reach opinions regarding risk in the case , given the context of the evaluation . gathering information requires patience , thoroughness and persistence . rather than diagnostic or interviewing brilliance and the painstaking assembling of facts and the checking of information from a variety of sources . as we noted , however , the context of the evaluation sets limits on the quantity and quality of information available to clinicians . for instance , emergency room clinicians do not have the information or the time available to gather information that clinicians typically have in longterm forensic facilities . information should be gathered about multiple issues or topics and from multiple sources . most spj guidelines make explicit recommendations for gathering information , although the specific topics and sources relevant in a given case vary according to the nature of the risks being assessed and the specifics of the case . for example , information about an examinee sexual functioning is likely to be directly relevant to considering his or her risk for sexual violence but is likely to be less relevant to an evaluation of risk for terroristic violence . one important topic about which information should be gathered in every case is the examinee history of violence . we agree with the sage advice from years ago : of paramount importance is a meticulous description of the actual assault . . the description of the aggressor in action is often the most valuable single source of information . if there is such a history , the evaluator should construct a timeline of violent incidents to look for evidence of patterns , such as a clear trajectory or triggering events . for each major incident , the evaluator should attempt to determine who was involved , what happened and why , where and when it happened , and the examinee reactions . typically , sources of information will include : interviews with and direct observation of the examinee . interviews with victims of or witnesses to past violence or review of their documented accounts . interviews with collateral informants , such as family members , friends , and coworkers . review of collateral records including but not limited to criminal histories from various agencies , police reports , statements by the examinee , and statements by victims and witnesses concerning past violence ; prosecution and court files ; daily logs from institutional and community corrections ; presentence or predisposition reports ; mental health and medical treatment records ; assessment and treatment reports by civil and forensic mental health consultants ; daily logs from outpatient and inpatient treatment facilities ; and school , employment , and military records . however , in many cases it is impossible to gather and consider all the information available in a given case . evaluators must balance comprehensiveness with efficiency by focusing on information that is useful , unique , and trustworthy . with respect to the quality of information , evaluators must make judgments about the credibility of various sources of information on which they relied and attempt to reconcile any contradictory information . for example , there may be contradictory information concerning the extent of the examinee history of violence or the examinee behavior during the most recent act of violence ; the examinee history of employment or intimate relationship problems may be unclear ; or there may be no information concerning the examinee plans for release from hospital or prison into the community . step two : identify the presence of risk factors . evaluators can not keep in their heads all the information they gathered in its raw or original form ; they simplify it by sorting it into useful units : risk factors . the primary problem here is that evaluators may not use consistent or sensible frameworks to sort information . they may give insufficient weight to risk factors with established validity or too much weight to risk factors of little or questionable validity . worse still , they may use a framework that is implicit , so they are not entirely conscious or selfaware of what they did or did not consider risk factors . spj guidelines structure this part of the evaluation process by giving evaluators a checklist or aide memoire of risk factors whose validity is supported by systematic review of the scientific and professional literature . the goal is to focus the attention of evaluators in the first instance on those issues or topics that are considered important in general for evaluations of that sort things that should be considered at a minimum . the list of risk factors is intended to be reasonably thorough or comprehensive but by no means exhaustive ; evaluators are encouraged to go beyond the standard risk factors to identify rare or casespecific risk factors , should they be able to provide a compelling clinical or logical rationale for doing so . we stress that clinicians should be able to articulate a clear rationale for considering casespecific factors and should do so only if it is not possible to capture risk factors with the prespecified list available on the particular instrument . this will help to avoid the inclusion of risk factors that are unlikely to be associated with violence . in addition to identifying risk factors , spj guidelines discuss the nature and definition of the risk factors , summarize the evidence supporting their validity , and provide guidance for determining if they are or have been present over time in the case at hand . most spj guidelines include a minimum of about ten and a maximum of about thirty risk factors , although the number , conceptualization , and definition of risk factors vary across guidelines , according to the nature of the risks being evaluated and the nature of the evaluators who will be using the guidelines or the settings in which they will be used . we have opted in this chapter not to provide a detailed review of important violence risk factors , as they are for the most part very well cataloged on contemporary violence risk assessment instruments . step three : evaluate the relevance of risk factors . risk factors may be relevant in general or on average according to the scientific and professional literature but apparently irrelevant in the case at hand on the basis of idiographic evaluation . the next step , then , is to analyze the risk factors identified as present to make sure they are relevant that is , germane to the examinee risk for violence and the management of that risk . as noted previously , a recent development in the spj approach , reflected most clearly in the hcr twenty , is to encourage evaluators to consider the relevance of each risk factor both individually and collectively . the crux of the issue is aptly delineated by kluckhohn and murray : very man is in certain respects like all other men , like some other men , like no other man . in essence , violence risk assessments must investigate all three of these issues . determining relevance is an exercise in abductive inference , that is , inference to the best explanation or , as it is more commonly referred to in clinical practice , formulation . formulation of violence risk should be guided by theory , and it is common in the spj approach to use decision theory . decision theory may be considered a version of a wellestablished theory of criminal behavior known as the psychology of criminal conduct or the general personality and cognitive social learning perspective but tailored specifically to violence . decision theory views violence as a choice . the decision may be made quickly , based on poor information , and with little care and attention that is , it may be a bad decision or a decision made badly but it is a decision nonetheless . the bottom line is that , with very rare exceptions , all people think before they commit violence : they choose whom they commit violence against , when they will commit it , and what kinds of violence they will commit . within the framework of decision theory , it is assumed that before people engage in violence , they have gone through a fourstep thought process : the possibility of acting violently in a given situation entered their conscious awareness , and they entertained this notion rather than dismissing it or pushing it out of their minds . they evaluated the possible positive consequences of violence and determined that it might result in reward or benefit for them . put simply , they perceived that violence might pay off . they evaluated the possible negative consequences of violence and determined that the costs were acceptable . they evaluated their options for committing violence and determined it was feasible . according to the decision theory framework , comprehensive clinical evaluations of violence risk require evaluators to understand how and why examinees decided to engage in violence as well as why they decided not to engage in violence in the past , including the various factors that impinged on or influenced their decision making , and also to understand what interventions , events , and occurrences might encourage examinees decisions to act prosocially and discourage their decisions to act nonviolently . risk factors , then , are things that influence decision making . they can motivate , disinhibit , or destabilize decisions . motivators increase the perceived rewards or benefits of violence . disinhibitors decrease the perceived costs or negative consequences of violence . destabilizers generally disturb or disorganize people ability to monitor and control their decision making . step four : develop scenarios of violence . next , evaluators must make judgments about the examinee potential for violence in light of the presence and relevance of risk factors . simply concluding that an examinee is a high risk for violence or has a fifty four percent chance of violence within ten years is not sufficient for making any kind of reasonable clinical or even legal decision . instead , evaluators need to consider what kinds of violence the examinee might perpetrate , for which motivations , against which victims , with what kinds of consequences , and at which times . in short , they need to consider scenarios of violence . each scenario is a story about violence the examinee might commit . it is not a prediction about what will happen ; rather , it is a general forecast or speculation about what reasonably could happen , in light of the evaluator general knowledge and experience and the specifics of the case at hand . although the number of possible scenarios that could be constructed is virtually infinite , in any given case only a few distinct scenarios should seem reasonable , credible , or plausible in light of what is known about fact and theory . other scenarios will be perceived as implausible and subsequently dismissed , or pruned . the spj approach to developing scenarios of violence was derived from the more general management strategy known as scenario planning , which has been used for more than fifty years in such fields as business , health care , and the military . according to chermack and lynham , scenario planning is a process of positing several informed , plausible and imagined alternative future environments in which decisions about the future may be played out , for the purpose of changing current thinking , improving decision making , enhancing human and organization learning and improving performance . it is most appropriate for situations of complexity and unbounded uncertainty in our view , an accurate characterization of the state of affairs in which many violence risk assessments are conducted . the spj approach encourages evaluators to consider four broad scenarios of violence . the evaluator considers a scenario in which the examinee commits violence similar to his or her most recent act what might be called a repeat , flat trajectory , linear projection , or point projection scenario . the evaluator considers a scenario in which the trajectory of violence decreases , and the examinee commits a less serious act or even chooses to desist altogether a bestcase or optimistic scenario . the evaluator considers a worstcase scenario , also known as a pessimistic or doom scenario , one in which the trajectory increases , and the examinee commits a more serious , and perhaps even lifethreatening , act of violence . the evaluator considers a twist or sideways trajectory scenario in which the nature of violence changes or evolves , such as with respect to the manner of victim selection or the type of coercion used . multiple scenarios could be developed within each of these four broad categories . then , for each scenario , the evaluator develops a detailed description in terms of the nature , severity , imminence , frequency or duration , and likelihood of violence . finally , the evaluator trims the scenarios that seem implausible based on theory , research , experience , and case facts . in our experience , three to five general scenarios usually are sufficient to capture the range of plausible outcomes in a given case . step five : consider management plans . next , consistent with general principles of scenario planning , evaluators develop case management plans based on plausible scenarios of violence , which in turn were based on the presence and relevance of risk factors . it is common in the spj approach to structure development of plans by considering four general categories of strategies : monitoring , supervision , treatment , and victim safety planning . within each general category of strategies , evaluators identify specific strategies , then translate these into more detailed plans by considering tactics and even logistics . step six : communicate findings . in step six , evaluators should document and communicate their judgments regarding the overall risk in the case . evaluators are encouraged to make judgments concerning such things as case prioritization or overall risk for violence , risk for serious physical harm , any indication of other risks the examinee may pose , any immediate actions taken or required , and critical dates or triggers for case review . it is during this step that evaluators can assign ratings of low , moderate , or high risk the summary risk ratings discussed in detail earlier . these are the key , encapsulating judgments that professionals offer in order to inform risk management . as our research review demonstrated , they are as or more accurate than actuarial estimates . critically , as discussed earlier , the spj approach does not make these judgments using a fixed and explicit algorithm based on some combination of risk factors ; instead , evaluators use their discretion to consider , decide , and explain the relevance or meaningfulness of any factors that are present with respect to the risks posed and management of those risks . also , evaluators are encouraged to limit or qualify their opinions based on the quantity and quality of case information they reviewed . additional considerations . four additional themes consistently emerge from both the literature and court decisions regarding what a reasonably competent assessment of risk entails , once clinicians are aware that there exist reasonable grounds to believe patients may pose a risk for violence . when tarasoff liability has been imposed on clinicians , it has usually been because of the failure of the clinician to abide by one or more of these themes . throughout the process , clinicians should make all reasonable efforts to obtain details of the patient history of violence and response to treatment for violence . for any reasonably comprehensive assessment , the painstaking assembling of facts and the checking of information from a variety of sources are essential . the examinee versions of events should be checked against collateral information , including police and victim versions of events . clinicians must be alert to their own possible tendencies to avoid , deny , or wishfully minimize violent themes and affects . that is , if the possibility of violence risk arises in a clinical context , it must be investigated in a reasonably full and complete manner . in our view , this entails the use of comprehensive violence risk assessment procedures , such as those provided under the spj approach . the use of such an approach minimizes the chances that important risk factors will be overlooked . when patients appear to be at risk for violence , they should be asked if they are thinking of harming anyone and , if so , how they have dealt with such thoughts and feelings in the past . appelbaum and gutheil suggested that it is often useful to ask examinees whether they have ever caused the death or serious injury of another person , even if accidentally . borum , swartz , and swanson suggested : are you the sort of person who has trouble controlling your temper ? and have you found yourself hitting people or damaging things when you are angry ? . monahan observed : directly asking patients about violent behavior and possible indices of violent behavior is surely the easiest and quickest way to obtain this essential information . openended questions such as what is the most violent thing you have ever done ? or what is the closest you have ever come to being violent ? may be useful probes , as might do you ever worry that you might physically hurt somebody ? the obvious problem , of course , is that patients may lie or distort their history or their current thoughts . . quite often , however , patients are remarkably forthcoming about violence . consider the circumstances the examinee may be facing in the future . are these circumstances similar to those that have led to violence in the past ? or are these circumstances that have reduced the risk of violence in the past ? if the examinee will be returning to a less restrictive environment , does he or she demonstrate a meaningful understanding of how to avoid violence in the future ? has the examinee demonstrated a commitment to avoiding violence in the future ? in general , it is worth noting lion observation that an appearance of tranquility in a violent person can be deceptive . discharging the patient can be an error when the problem has not been really resolved . the clinician must consider whether anything has really changed . when in doubt , consult . indeed , when and where feasible , even when not in doubt , consult . simply put , it is both ethically and legally advisable to obtain a second , knowledgeable opinion about what to do when one is uncertain whether a patient poses a serious risk of causing serious harm to another person or persons . we make the next additional recommendations that are useful to consider in fulfilling the demands of comprehensive risk assessments that are ethically and legally defensible . as the violent history of the examinee becomes more distant in time , more effort may be required to accurately reconstruct the details , but such efforts should be made . at the same time , all potential sources of information regarding the examinee former violence , current behavior , and mental status should be considered . in institutional contexts , it is generally sensible to have patients assessed by clinicians who are not attached to the patient treatment and care before final decisions or recommendations are made . this recommendation offered to facilitate objectivity in assessment is consistent with ethical guidelines for mental health professionals . treating clinicians , and ward staff in general , may become so invested in believing that particular patients under their care have made adequate progress , or may so want to avoid disrupting the relative equilibrium achieved by a formerly more disorganized patient , or may so want to support the aspirations of a wellliked patient , that they avoid seeing negative signs and confronting the patient with difficult but necessary questions . conversely , a patient who is uncooperative or challenging toward staff on the ward may be viewed as more dangerous than he or she really is . therefore , except in obvious cases , a more detached evaluator may be called for . when inpatients pose a risk of serious violence , recommendations for release should not be made without subjecting the patient to stressful questions regarding the sources of his or her previous violence and what the patient needs to do to avoid violence in the future . as borum observed : many potentially violent patients can and will appear calm and nonthreatening when not challenged , frustrated , or irritated . the clinician needs to be able to gingerly increase the frustration or challenge in the interview to test the frustration tolerance and impulse control of the patient without precipitating a dangerous outburst . a highly structured , unchallenging interview can dull the examiner into underestimating the violent potential of the patient . in certain circumstances , with certain patients , we would make the point even more strongly : sometimes it is precisely the question or challenge that will precipitate a dangerous outburst that must be posed . indeed , sometimes the clinician inner sense that certain areas should be avoided lest the patient become overly disturbed is the best guide to determining what areas require further exploration . of course , there is no legitimate reason to provoke a patient needlessly . thus , there may be no reason to subject a patient to a stressful interview if it is clear from other information that less secure supervision is not in order in any event . but when a patient with a history of serious violence is being considered for transfer to a less secure setting , it is hard to imagine concluding that transfer is in order without at least determining how the patient reacts to stressful questions regarding the circumstances he or she is likely to face in a new setting . even when stressful questions are indicated , clinicians should be careful not to be excessively , or needlessly , aggressive in their manner or confrontations . and clinicians should take reasonable steps to calm a disturbed patient once a stressful interview has ended . in any event , however , in order to pose suitably stressful questions to the patient , the assessor must be knowledgeable beforehand about the particular vulnerabilities of the patient . that is , in order to conduct an adequate stress interview , the clinician must first thoroughly inform him or herself about what has led to and triggered violence or regressions in the patient in the past . indeed , it can not be overly stressed that comprehensive risk assessments can be accomplished only if the assessor is first well versed about the examinee history . it has often been said of legal trial practice that preparation is the key to crossexamination . equally so , preparation is the key to a fully comprehensive risk assessment . a number of commentators have suggested that assessments of violence risk can be improved if assessors avoid making errors that have frequently been observed to pertain to dangerousness evaluations . among the relevant recommendations are that the clinicians should : recognize their own legitimate doubts and legitimate disagreements between evaluators and among staff regarding an examinee risk level to avoid unjustifiably confident determinations of dangerousness in either direction . clinicians should avoid a judgmental perspective or aligning themselves too much with the patient wishes and desires . they should be open to information that contradicts their initial , or even stated , opinion . indeed , as appelbaum and gutheil stressed , it may be useful in many forensic evaluations for clinicians to imagine that they were retained as an expert by the other side of the case , and to imagine how their evaluation or conclusions might be different if that were so . be careful not to underestimate the potential for violence in female patients who have a history of violence . it is true that , on the whole in our society , women have a much lower rate of violence than men , yet research indicates that women who evidence risk factors for violence are about as likely as men to commit violence and that , relative to their estimations regarding men , clinicians tend to underestimate the risk of future violence with women . with these guidelines and recommendations in mind , we now turn to a discussion of how violence risk assessment has fared in the courts . violence risk assessments and the law . in this section , we review certain important legal developments concerning assessments of dangerousness by mental health professionals . assessments of dangerousness and the supreme court . despite qualms expressed by various professional organizations and legal commentators , and some of their own brethren , the supreme court of the united states has been receptive to assessments of dangerousness and risk by mental health professionals in a variety of circumstances . most notable perhaps , in barefoot estelle , by a six vote , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of a sentence of death that was based in part on the prediction of a testifying psychiatrist that the probability that the defendant would commit additional crimes of violence in prison if not executed was one hundred percent and absolute . although not unmindful of the questions that existed regarding the validity of predictions of violence by mental health professionals , in barefoot , the majority opined that such questions could adequately be dealt with by the trier of fact , we are not persuaded , stated the court , that such testimony is almost entirely unreliable and that the factfinder and the adversary system will not be competent to uncover , recognize and take due account of its shortcomings . in schall martin , the supreme court observed that from a legal point of view there is nothing inherently unattainable about a prediction of future criminal conduct and that the lower court had specifically rejected the contention , based on . sociological data . ,  that it is impossible to predict future violent behavior . more recently , us supreme court justice stevens reasoned in his dissent in united states scheffer that here is no legal requirement that expert testimony must satisfy a particular degree of reliability to be admissible . expert testimony about a defendant future dangerousness to determine his eligibility for the death penalty , even if wrong most of the time , is routinely admitted . similarly , in kansas hendricks and kansas crane , the court voiced approval of risk assessment in the sexual predator context . in hendricks , the supreme court determined the constitutionality of a sexually violent predator statute , permitting the postincarceration civil commitment of sex offenders . the intent of the statute was to civilly detain people who presented a risk to public safety due to tendencies to perpetrate sexual violence . as with other types of civil commitment , a determination of future dangerousness was required by the statute . future dangerousness could be determined by past sexually violent behavior , such as the crime for which the individual was incarcerated , and a connection between that behavior and a mental abnormality reducing the individual control over the dangerous behavior . the supreme court determined that postconviction civil commitment in this manner did not violate substantive due process rights under the constitution . in kansas crane , the court further interpreted this statute and held that the lack of control over the sexually violent behavior did not have to be absolute . in its reasoning , the court continued to demonstrate amenability toward risk assessment and a reliance on mental health professionals in stating that the lack of behavioral control , when viewed in light of such features of the case as the nature of the psychiatric diagnosis and the severity of the mental abnormality itself , must be sufficient to distinguish the dangerous sexual offender whose serious mental illness , abnormality , or disorder subjects him to civil commitment from the dangerous but typical recidivist convicted in an ordinary criminal case . recent developments concerning the admissibility of testimony about violence risk . our own survey of state and federal cases considering the admissibility of expert testimony on risk assessment reveals that it is rarely excluded . testimony on risk assessment can be based on clinical interviewing techniques , reliance on results from actuarial instruments , or a combination of these techniques . clinical assessments of dangerousness have long been admissible under the frye test , which still prevails in many states and which allows for expert testimony regarding the results of professional procedures when those procedures have gained general acceptance in their field . moreover , little has changed in the federal courts since frye was supplanted by daubert . when testimony is based on the results of a clinical interview alone , courts typically admit the testimony , stating that clinical interviewing techniques are generally accepted . however , some courts have determined that reliance only on a clinical interview and failure to use actuarial instruments renders expert testimony unreliable . when the testimony is based in part on the results of actuarial instruments , typically it is also admitted . many courts have indicated that testimony based in part on actuarial instruments is admissible because it is combined with clinical opinion . courts have not specifically stated that testimony based solely on the results of actuarial instruments would be excluded . however , this has been implied by court arguments that the testimony is admissible only because combined with clinical judgment . for example , one court stated : by this ruling , we are not concluding that actuarial risk assessment instruments are reliable per se or have our approval when used alone and not in conjunction with a full clinical evaluation . we note this was not the situation or issue presented in the instant case . the instruments were used in conjunction with a full clinical evaluation and their limitations were clearly made known to the jury . regardless of the basis for the testimony , courts have rarely given substantive consideration to the reliability of risk assessment in their admission decisions , even after the daubert and kumho tire opinions . in their assessment of reliability , courts have taken several approaches . typically , courts argue that a frye or daubert evaluation of the evidence is inappropriate . many courts draw a distinction between clinical observations , which have a medical basis , and the use of actuarial instruments , which have a scientific basis . when this distinction is made , it is reasoned that a reliability analysis does not apply to the clinical observations because they are not scientific or novel , they are based on standard psychological analysis of behavioral observations , and they are based on experience . courts are more likely to subject actuarial tools to frye or daubert analyses , but the application of these standards to actuarial instruments varies across jurisdictions . as noted , some courts have argued that frye and daubert do not apply to the scientifically based actuarial instruments when they are combined with clinical interviewing , but that they would be if presented alone . they reason that the instruments do not act as a source of infallible truth or scientific infallibility when combined with clinical judgment . other courts have argued that a frye or daubert analysis must be conducted when any part of the testimony is based on the actuarial instruments because they are scientific . these courts have largely determined that the use of actuarial instruments in risk assessment is generally accepted and reliable , and the testimony is admitted . some courts have pronounced the instruments generally accepted and their results admissible even without a frye hearing . regarding the actuarial instruments , one court concluded that they were at least as good , if not in most cases better , in terms of reliability and predictability than clinical interviews . some courts that previously determined that testimony based on actuarial instruments was inadmissible because the tools were not generally accepted were later overruled by courts finding that they are generally accepted . however , some courts continue to reason that actuarial instruments are irrelevant and speculative in demonstrating lack of propensity for future risk of violence . other courts concluding that testimony based on actuarial instruments satisfies frye when used to predict recidivism require frye hearings when these tools are used for other purposes , such as demonstrating the existence of a mental illness . most of these decisions have arisen from frye jurisdictions , but reasoning about these cases in daubert jurisdictions does not differ substantially . the daubert factors are rarely applied to this type of testimony or are applied loosely . finally , many courts decline to assess reliability for the purpose of admission decisions , reasoning that questions of reliability go to the weight , not to the admissibility , of the evidence , or have determined that frye and daubert do not apply to the legal context of the case , such as sentencing . in short , whether in frye or in daubert jurisdictions , courts have been receptive to violence risk assessments , whether clinical or actuarial , by mental health professionals . civil commitment decisions . in addington texas , the us supreme court ruled that individuals could be involuntarily committed to a mental hospital for an extended period of time only if there was clear and convincing evidence that they met a legitimate legal standard for confinement . therefore , to the extent that dangerousness as well as mental illness is required by law to justify an extended commitment , addington requires that such dangerousness be proven by clear and convincing evidence . the court in addington also observed , whether the individual is mentally ill and dangerous to either himself or others and is in need of confined therapy turns on the meaning of the facts which must be interpreted by expert psychiatrists and psychologists . there are two points to note about the addington decision . first , it applied only to extended confinements . therefore , presumably , less than clear and convincing evidence of mental illness and dangerousness could justify a relatively brief commitment for the purpose of further evaluation . second , it is important to recognize that the requirement of clear and convincing evidence of dangerousness , when it exists , is not a requirement of proof that the individual is more likely than not to be violent if not hospitalized . rather , it is a requirement for clear and convincing evidence of enough risk of enough harm to justify the confinement at issue . indeed , in a nineteen ninety decision , the ninth circuit court of appeals ruled that a finding of substantial risk may be based on any activity that evinces a genuine possibility of future harm to persons or property . and the court also rejected the notion that , to be constitutional , a civil commitment must be based on a recent overt act or threat of violence . rather , the court stated , whether activity occurred recently is but one factor . to consider in weighing the evidence . the decision in the sahhar case is emblematic of a recent trend away from the strict standards for civil commitments that were established in some jurisdictions in the nineteen seventies to more flexible criteria . this trend can best be appreciated by comparing more recent decisions with the rulings in lessard schmidt , an oftencited federal court decision of a generation ago that strictly limited the government power to civilly commit mentally ill individuals . in lessard , the court ruled that a commitment could be justified only by proof of an extreme likelihood that if the person is not confined he will do immediate harm to himself or others . moreover , the lessard court held that the necessary determination of dangerousness had to be based upon a finding of a recent overt act , attempt , or threat to do substantial harm to oneself or another . in addition to rejecting the notion that violence must be likely or based on a recent overt act or threat in order to justify a commitment , other court decisions have rejected the notion that future dangerousness must be imminent to justify confinement . for example , in nineteen ninety one , the supreme court of massachusetts held that to the degree that the anticipated harm is serious . some lessening of a requirement of imminence seems justified ; and in seltzer hogue , a new york state appellate court upheld the continued confinement of a mentally ill person who in the past had invariably become violent following his release from hospitalization , even though he had not been imminently violent upon release . thus , as one of us has written elsewhere : it appears that as the earlier abuses of the civil commitment system are supplanted in judicial and public concern by concern about potential violence by mentally ill persons who perhaps could not be committed under a strict reading of earlier and more libertarian oriented decisions , the judicial pendulum is swinging toward a greater willingness to allow civil commitments to protect the public from potential danger , and to allow that danger to be assessed broadly , rather than by rigid , impractical rules . moreover , it should be pointed out , the us supreme court has ruled that insanity acquittees may be required to prove that they are no longer dangerous before being released from confinement . and in the case of in the matter of george , the new york court of appeals approvingly quoted from an earlier decision regarding insanity acquittees that compliance or lack of dangerousness in a facility does not necessarily mean that an individual does not suffer from a dangerous mental disorder . even more recently , regarding the retention of insanity acquittees , the new york court of appeals opined : in addition to recent acts of violence . a court may consider the nature of the conduct that resulted in the initial commitment , the likelihood of relapse or cure , history of substance or alcohol abuse , the effects of medication , the likelihood that the patient will discontinue medication without supervision , the length of confinement and treatment , the lapse of time since the underlying criminal acts and any other relevant factors that form a part of an insanity acquittee psychological profile . of course , it is ultimately for the courts , rather than clinicians , to decide when mentally disordered individuals pose a sufficient risk of causing significant harm to justify depriving them of their liberty . but emergency room clinicians must make such decisions regarding emergency admissions , and judges frequently look to clinicians for their input and insights before making their decisions . therefore , before clinicians deem a patient to be dangerous for commitment purposes , they should be mindful of the fact that they are , indeed , making a risk assessment and that , just as a sufficient risk of future violence may justify a patient confinement , so , too , a patient right to liberty should be weighed in the balance . . the case law , research , and voluminous commentary that have followed from the tarasoff decision can not be reviewed here ; nor can the various laws and professional regulations defining tarasofflike duties that have been adopted in many states , or the differing responsibilities held by inpatient and outpatient clinicians . suffice it to say for the purposes of this chapter that clearly one component of the duty to protect is the duty to conduct a professionally adequate risk assessment when such an assessment is called for . the field of violence risk assessment has made considerable strides in recent years . indeed , since the publication of the previous version of this chapter , several hundred empirical studies have been published on violence risk assessment instruments . we have indeed made progress in terms of understanding how to develop and validate risk assessment instruments and how instruments from different families fare relative to one another . perhaps one of the biggest developments is that , contrary to previous opinion , clinical judgments of risk so long as they are derived in a structured context , such as that provided by the spj model are as or more accurate compared to actuarial predictions of violence . this is a major and liberating finding that can facilitate focus on other important topics within risk assessment . for instance , there has been great conceptual progress on the process of risk assessment at the individual case level this topic would benefit greatly from a comparable amount of empirical attention . for instance , how do clinicians decide which risk factors are most relevant in a given case ? how do they integrate this information into formulations ? does this improve the quality of risk management ? the risk assessment field could benefit from turning its attention to several other areas of focus in the future . first , although commentators have been stressing the importance of dynamic risk for some time , the empirical evaluation of changes in risk factors over time lags . this is understandable it is hard research to conduct . yet many questions remain : which factors change ? what is the nature of change ? does change relate to changes in violence ? can we impact change deliberately ? for which risk factors ? sustained attention to dynamic risk will allow the field to continue to move toward a risk reduction or risk management focus . that is , studies of whether risk assessment instruments can be used to assign persons to treatment intensities , with specified relevant risk factors , are necessary . there is evidence from the correctional field that such a focus could indeed reduce violence . there has been a movement over the past decade or so to increase the focus on protective factors . as yet , the field of forensic mental health has not come to terms with the conceptual nature of protective factors and how they interact with risk factors . are they distinct from risk factors ? or are they the opposite pole of risk factors ? are they relevant in the absence of risk factors , or only when risk factors are present ? regardless of the answer to these important conceptual questions , it is clear that important strides are under way to understand the role that focusing on positive aspects of our clients lives might have . for example , several assessment instruments focus on positive aspects of clients . the start requires ratings of patient strengths along with vulnerabilities . the savry contains a subscale devoted to protective factors . the saprof is devoted entirely to protective factors and is intended to be used in conjunction with an spj risk assessment instrument such as the hcr twenty . empirical support for the utility of each of these measures is accruing , and we encourage the continued attention to this topic . although hardly a new concern , we advocate continued efforts to test and ensure that risk assessment instruments can be used ethically with persons of all ethnic backgrounds , whether male or female , and regardless of sexual orientation . evidence drawn from metaanalyses suggests that it is unlikely that there are major problems in this regard . some concerns were evident in the findings reported by singh et alfurther , it is important to understand whether , even if a risk assessment instrument predicts violence comparably well across , say , men and women , its risk factors have comparable meaning or relevance across gender . to some extent , this question can be integrated into the formulation stage of clinical assessment , where clinicians are grappling with making sense of the meaning of certain risk factors for individuals . continued work on this topic is necessary . finally , we think it is important that researchers expand their topics beyond those concerning the predictive accuracy of instruments . assessing and improving predictive accuracy is crucial , to be sure . however , as described earlier concerning the process of risk assessment , there are other important topics to understand . one such topic is related to both assessing and improving predictive validity : to what extent might postrelease intervention or management moderate , and possibly improve , predictive accuracy ? we want our assessments to influence practice and reduce risk . however , if we study accuracy issues within realworld settings , where risk assessments may influence interventions , those interventions interfere with the outcomes that we are interested in . hence , research should attempt to build expected treatment or intervention dosage into predictive models . one such example was recently provided by belfrage , who demonstrated that persons judged to be higher risk on the sara by police , who also received higher doses of risk management , were less likely to recidivate in the future relative to highrisk persons who received lower doses of management . although great strides have been made in the risk assessment field , it is clear that much important work remains . 