conducting child custody and parenting evaluations . in the past thirty years , there has been a steady growth in the use of psychologists and other mental health professionals in child custody matters . evaluations conducted by psychologists assist the court in determining custody , decision making , access , and parenting plans when parents separate or divorce . at the same time , there has been an increase in the number of books devoted to child custody evaluations and broader forensic psychology practice . in considering the necessary ingredients of child custody and parenting evaluation practice , there are many areas in which a psychologist must gain proficiency . at a minimum , these include child development ; qualities of parenting ; divorce and the impact of the separation and divorce on families ; psychological assessment ; and special issues , such as alienation of children , domestic violence , child abuse , relocation law , family dynamics in cases of extreme conflict , and personality dynamics that contribute to that extreme and ongoing conflict . finally , evaluators need to have a thorough understanding of the ethical issues that surface when undertaking these complex evaluations for families and the courts . these evaluations are time and cost intensive and potentially intrusive to the family , and they risk putting the children in the middle of their parents conflicts . when ordered by the court to participate in an evaluation , parents are subjected to multiple interviews , perhaps psychological testing , and exposure of their conflicts to teachers , therapists , and other professionals . children are interviewed and observed in offices and their homes . this lengthy process typically takes three to four months to complete and yields a report that is potentially insightful and potentially damaging to the family . child custody and parenting evaluations are among the most difficult and challenging of all psychological evaluations . reasons for this include : the number of people and relationships in the family to be evaluated . the different ages of the children . the range of possible psychopathology . the presence of significant situational factors affecting psychological functioning . the limitations of psychological tests or interview methods designed for this type of assessment . the changing nature of a child developmental or psychological needs relative to future timesharing plans . the expansive nature of individual questions a court may have about a particular family . in addition to these complexities , child custody evaluators must have knowledge of relevant statutes and case law . the model standards of practice for child custody evaluation state that evaluators should be knowledgeable about the legal and professional standards , laws , and rules applicable to the jurisdiction in which the evaluation is requested . in addition , the guidelines for child custody evaluations in family law proceedings of the american psychological association , designed to provide guidance to those who perform child custody evaluations , direct that psychologists should strive to gain and maintain specialized knowledge , augment their existing skills , acquire sufficient understanding of the specialized child custody literature , and remain familiar with applicable legal standards in the relevant state in which they oneractice . 1 the model standards state that the child custody evaluation process involves the compilation of information and the formulation of opinions pertaining to the custody or parenting of a child and the dissemination of that information and those opinions to the court , to the litigants , and to the litigants attorneys . the goal of the guidelines for child custody evaluations is to promote proficiency in the conduct of these particular evaluations , and the purpose of the evaluation is to assist in determining the psychological best interests of the child . ultimately , the purpose of custody and parenting evaluations is to do all of these things . the evaluation process is associated with a dramatically increased risk of licensing complaints against the evaluator and is often stressful for the examiner . thus , evaluators must have the temperament to conduct very comprehensive evaluations and recognize that they may be subjected to anger from parents and an adversarial trial experience . distorted representations or accusations against the evaluator by one or both parents are not uncommon , both in complaints to the court and in complaints to licensing boards . because serious allegations are common to the types of cases that fail at mediation and other attempts at settlement , the evaluator recommendations can have particularly significant ramifications for the child future . although this chapter can not address all of the issues relevant to child custody and parenting evaluations , it focuses on these issues : the best interests of the child standard . the purpose of custody and parenting evaluations . ethical considerations . basic research the evaluator must know , especially about children and the impact of divorce on children . critical research in special issues , such as conflict between parents , alienated children , domestic violence , sexual abuse , and relocation . the process of custody and parenting evaluation . critical issues in report writing . it is incumbent on the child custody evaluator to be familiar with the law that governs these issues as they pertain to child custody . in nearly all fifty states and in most western countries , laws related to the best interests of the child guide decisions about child custody and parenting plans . few states define the term best interests of the child , although many identify specific factors that judges are to consider when making decisions about a child best interests , leading some commentators to argue that the best interests standard is not defined . indeed , judges are afforded great latitude to order a parenting plan that they decide is in the child best interests . lewis argued that he elegance of the standard is the simultaneous focus on both the needs of the particular child and , with appropriate weight , the normative child development factors . in jurisdictions where the legislature has identified several specific factors that the judge must consider , the weight assigned to each factor is left to the court . the evaluator task is to gather and present those psychological data related to the best interests factors and answer the questions posed by the court . in arizona , for example , several best interests factors call for psychological data to be gathered . they include : the wishes of the child as to custodian . the interaction and interrelationship of the child with the child parent or parents , the child siblings , and any other person who may significantly affect the child best interests . the child adjustment to home , school , and community . which parent is more likely to allow the child frequent and meaningful continuing contact with the other parent . whether one parent , both parents , or neither parent has provided primary care of the child . although the evaluator gathers and analyzes data related to the best interests factors , the judge reaches the ultimate determination of the child best interests based on his or her discretion . in an effort to help judges weigh best interests factors in specific cases , a retired california superior court judge identified certain traits and issues that are common in divorcing families and suggested that these traits be appropriately weighted in specific cases . the traits include those listed next . quality of parenting . quality of coparenting . garbolino suggested that the factors likely to be of importance to the wellbeing of children vary across families and need to be weighed with discretion . regardless of whether a state has specific factors delineated in its best interests statute or whether there is a presumption associated with a particular factor , the ultimate decision about weighting of these factors is unique to each family and is left to judicial discretion . when completing an evaluation of a given family , the evaluator task is to provide a rationale as to why different factors might be more or less relevant with that particular family . this rationale , of course , will be reflected in the analysis of the data gathered and in the recommendations provided to the court . this analysis can assist the judge in considering and weighting the issues . this topic is discussed more fully in the section on report writing near the end of this chapter . purpose of a custody and parenting evaluation . for the court , the primary purpose of the evaluation is to assist the court in case a settlement is not reached . judges order child custody evaluations for a variety of reasons . these can include those circumstances in which there are significant allegations regarding drug and alcohol abuse , family violence , or child abuse , or significant mental health problems . often a judge is presented with two parents , both of whom appear good enough at parenting but who can not agree on a parenting plan . at other times , one or both parents appear to have significant problems . increasingly , judges look to mental health professionals to help them understand complex psychological questions of attachment between the child and his or her parents , sibling relationships , and the developmental needs of children . in a mobile society , one parent may wish to relocate with the children for a variety of reasons , such as employment , economics , family support , or a new relationship . judges may order a child custody evaluation to address the relevant psychological factors associated with the relocation question . for example , in california , judges frequently request the assistance of an evaluator in a relocation case in order to provide information to the court about the relevant psychological issues described in the lamusga decision . among the many issues identified in the case were various factors the court would likely consider in a relocation matter . this guidance from case law also helps custody evaluators in california focus on those relevant psychological issues . similar case law decisions in other states would guide custody evaluators as well . although judges are guided by the law in making decisions regarding the best interests of children , they may look to the child custody evaluator to assist in understanding the family dynamics and the relevant psychological factors in order to reach a decision about what is in the child best interests . in many ways , the neutrally appointed child custody evaluator serves as a consultant to the judge , providing critical data about the family for a better understanding of the family dynamics and the needs of the children . the majority of separating parents reach an agreement about parenting and custody issues on their own or with the assistance of their attorneys or legal processes , such as mediation . these parents agree on important decisions about their children , such as where they will go to school , what extracurricular activities they will participate in , and what nonemergency medical procedures to consider . they agree on a parenting plan that will delineate the times their children spend with each parent . obviously , these families do not need to undergo an evaluation , nor would the court order one . in fact , given the potentially intrusive nature of child custody evaluations , in such situations it is highly likely that an evaluation would be harmful to the family . however , as many as twenty percent of families at some point in time after separation experience high conflict . they can not agree on the parenting plan or how to make decisions for their child , nor are they able to focus on their child needs because of their mutual differences . these parents may disagree on seemingly simple and minor issues , such as what time a child exchange is to take place or whether it is appropriate for the children to eat certain foods . with many of these families , there are allegations of domestic violence or significant mental health problems , alienation or estrangement of children , or substance abuse . the primary value of an evaluation in these circumstances is that the evaluation provides an opportunity for parents to voice their concerns to a neutral expert . a neutrally appointed child custody evaluator will spend considerable time with both parents trying to understand their concerns and their perceptions of their child needs . this can be comforting to parents and sometimes serves as a catalyst for them to move toward cooperation . by listening to children , evaluators can also identify when they are caught in a loyalty conflict between their parents and describe the impact of this conflict to the parents and the court . it is common for children voices to be absent in the courts in the united states , and participation in a child custody evaluation can help children voice their concerns , share their wishes , and explore their feelings . although the child custody evaluator is not serving as a therapist , the evaluation process may be therapeutic to children who participate in the evaluation . if the evaluator concludes that the child is experiencing significant problems , he or she can refer the child for therapy and help the parents understand their child developmental needs . in these ways , the evaluator serves to hear the child voice and advocate for the child psychological and developmental needs . a third potential benefit comes from the fact that the same mental health professional is observing all family members . in the midst of an acrimonious divorce , services are often fragmented , with each parent having his or her own therapist and attorney whose role is to advocate for their respective client . these professionals do not have critical information about the other family members and are not neutral with regard to the family . although their advice might be helpful and appropriate to their clients , their perspectives and recommendations may not be in the child best interests . even a child therapist may not be serving the child best interests if the therapist is only seeing one parent with the child and becomes an advocate for that parent . by having a neutrally appointed child custody evaluator listen to and observe all family members , interview relevant collateral witnesses , and consider everyone input before reaching conclusions about the children best interests , fragmentation is reduced . at the end of the evaluation process , when an evaluator writes a comprehensive report , parents benefit by learning about their child needs and how they can work together to meet those needs . the report can help parents focus on the child rather than on their conflicts with each other and can help them learn ways to resolve their conflicts and meet their child needs . furthermore , the evaluator can help parents understand relevant issues important to parents , such as when and how to incorporate overnight time with each parent for their young child , the impact of their conflict on their children , and the risks and benefits of shared parenting . this understanding will enable them to parent more effectively . ultimately , an evaluation is most helpful to the family when the report and conclusions reduce conflict , help parents reach an agreement without going to trial , and keep parents focused on their child needs and best interests . well done evaluations often help parents recognize the need for solution and compromise , and , while mediation may not have been successful prior to the evaluation , settlement may be much more likely after an evaluation . ethical considerations in child custody evaluations . along with any state or local court rules or statutes , and in addition to the afcc model standards and the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations described earlier , a number of other advisory documents guide the ethical practice of the child custody evaluator , including : ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct . applying psychology to civil proceedings . these documents provide considerable guidance for the evaluator . child custody evaluators who are not highly familiar with all of these documents are working at a considerable disadvantage and , therefore , are at increased risk for failing to maximally serve the court and family . maintaining specialized competence . child custody evaluations are a unique type of evaluation , one that requires specialized competence . eppcc standard two states , psychologists provide services . with populations and in areas only within the boundaries of their competence , based on their education , training , supervised experience , consultation , study , or professional experience . the model standards list relevant areas for continuing education training for those performing child custody evaluations . the model standards list eighteen areas of expected training for all child custody evaluators and five areas of specialized training for those evaluators performing custody evaluations in those particular areas . these areas of expected training include , among other items : the psychological and developmental needs of children . the effects of separation , divorce , domestic violence , substance abuse , child alienation , child maltreatment , and interparental conflict on the psychological and developmental needs of children . how to assess parenting capacity and coparenting capacity and construct effective parenting and coparenting plans . additionally , the specialty guidelines state , forensic practitioners make ongoing efforts to develop and maintain their competencies . keep abreast of developments in the fields of psychology and law . these several documents guide the evaluator in developing and maintaining ongoing continuing education in areas relevant to child custody evaluations . avoiding conflicts of interest . the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations state , psychologists strive to avoid conflicts of interest and multiple relationships in conducting evaluations , as certain prior roles may impair the objectivity of the child custody evaluator . furthermore , the guidelines for child custody evaluations advise against performing a child custody evaluation if the psychologist has provided therapeutic services to any of the parties in the past or present . evaluators may also consider disclosure of other preexisting professional roles with any family member such as having been the mediator ; personal relationships , such as having one child on the same little league team as the children in the family to be evaluated ; or even a close relationship with one of the attorneys before accepting an appointment . the appearance of conflict may be equally important to actual conflict in these cases . although there may not be any actual conflict , and although no ethics will have been violated by taking on the evaluation role in these circumstances , evaluators should recognize the risk that a parent who feels wronged by the evaluator recommendations might allege that the evaluator was biased because of these prior relationships . if such a parent later finds out about these relationships , it may serve as further reinforcement of such bias in the mind of the parent . advance disclosure of all prior relationships helps reduce the risk of such allegations . obtaining informed consent . even though child custody evaluations typically are courtordered , parents still need to understand the process . technically , informed consent is not obtained when the court orders an evaluation ; instead , custody evaluators are encouraged to obtain informed consent both in writing and orally at the start of the evaluation process . the document needs to explain critical issues , such as the general procedures that will be used , each parent role in the evaluation process , fees , and the limits of confidentiality . the evaluator needs to inform parents that a child custody evaluation is not a healthrelated procedure and that the evaluator will not bill a parent health insurance . additionally , because the eppcc requires psychologists to avoid doing harm when it is foreseeable , the evaluator should inform parents that one or both of them may be unhappy at the end of the evaluation process . it is recommended that the evaluator provide this document to the parents and their attorneys in advance of the start of the evaluation . finally , it is also important for the evaluator to inform potential collateral sources of the limits of confidentiality and the purpose for which the collateral information is being gathered . employing balanced and impartial procedures . according to afcc model standard five , child custody evaluators strive to use a balanced process in order to achieve objectivity , fairness , and independence : as one element of a balanced process , the evaluative criteria employed shall be the same for each parent child combination . in the interests of fairness and sound methodology , evaluators shall ensure that any allegation concerning a matter that the evaluator is likely to consider in formulating his opinion shall be brought to the attention of the party against whom the allegation is registered so that he is afforded an opportunity to respond . when the evaluator does not act in this way , it almost assuredly leads to a complaint of bias , sometimes made to the parent attorney , but potentially to the court or practitioner licensing board . using multiple sources of information . according to guideline ten of the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations , multiple methods of data gathering enhance the reliability and validity of psychologists eventual conclusions , opinions , and recommendations . unique as well as overlapping aspects of various measures contribute to a fuller picture of each examinee abilities , challenges , and preferences . these multiple methods usually include , at a minimum : multiple interviews with the parents . interviews with children when appropriate . observations of children and parents interacting , in formulating her opinion shall be brought to the attention of the party against whom the allegation is registered so that he is afforded an opportunity to respond . when the evaluator does not act in this way , it almost assuredly leads to a complaint of bias , sometimes made to the parent attorney , but potentially to the court or practitioner licensing board . using multiple sources of information . according to guideline ten of the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations , multiple methods of data gathering enhance the reliability and validity of psychologists eventual conclusions , opinions , and recommendations . unique as well as overlapping aspects of various measures contribute to a fuller picture of each examinee abilities , challenges , and preferences . these multiple methods usually include , at a minimum : multiple interviews with the parents . interviews with children when appropriate . observations of children and parents interacting . administration of psychological testing and parenting questionnaires . review of collateral documents . interviews with relevant professionals , family members , and friends . staying within the scope of the evaluation . guideline eight of the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations states : before agreeing to conduct a child custody evaluation , psychologists seek when necessary to clarify the referral question and to determine whether they are potentially able to provide opinions or recommendations . it may be helpful to have psychologists understanding of the scope of the evaluation confirmed in a court order , or by stipulation of all parties and their legal representatives . evaluators shall establish the scope of the evaluation as determined by court order or by a signed stipulation by the parties and their attorneys . if issues not foreseen at the outset of the evaluation arise and if it is the evaluator professional judgment that the scope of the evaluation must be widened , the evaluator shall seek the approval of the court or all attorneys prior to going beyond the originally designated scope of the evaluation . both of these require that the evaluator carefully consider the relevant issues in the case and make recommendations consistent with those issues . identifying the scope in advance of performing the evaluation also ensures that the evaluator has the necessary specialized training to conduct the evaluation , as noted earlier . differentiating observations , inferences , and conclusions . in the specialty guidelines , psychologists are reminded : in their communications , forensic practitioners strive to distinguish observations , inferences , and conclusions . forensic practitioners are encouraged to explain the relationship between their expert opinions and the legal issues and facts of the case at hand . additionally , specialty guideline eleven states , forensic practitioners are encouraged to disclose all sources of information obtained in the course of their professional services , and to identify the source of each piece of information that was considered and relied upon in formulating a particular conclusion opinion . ultimately , this guideline is to help parents understand the rationale for recommendations but also to assist the court in understanding the evaluator reasoning . within this context , it is equally important to provide a description of the risks and benefits of different options available to the court . this topic is discussed in greater detail in the report writing section further on . record keeping . because records are subject to subpoena and full disclosure is important in the interest of transparency and due process , the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations direct evaluators to keep complete , readable records with the expectation that others will review them in the event of ongoing litigation after the completion of the report : legal and ethical standards describe requirements for the appropriate development , maintenance , and disposal of professional records . the court expects psychologists providing child custody evaluations to preserve the data that inform their conclusions . this enables other professionals to analyze , understand , and provide appropriate support for psychologists forensic opinions . basic critical and relevant research , especially about children . given the admonition about training , this next section addresses basic research with which all custody evaluators should be familiar . divorce research . the impact of divorce on children has been studied for more than thirty years . global findings include that there is an increased risk of harm to children when their parents divorce and that most of the harm comes from the children exposure to poverty , conflict , limited access to one of their parents , and poor parenting . research also demonstrates that children are resilient and that the majority suffer no significant negative longterm effects as a result of the separation or divorce of their parents . children benefit when they are exposed to limited parental conflict and have regular and frequent contact with both of their goodenough parents , and when both parents can participate in a wide range of their child life experiences and activities . parenting plans for young children . the term parenting plans refers to both the legal custody and physical custody of children . legal custody refers to who has the authority to make important decisions about the children , whereas physical custody refers to where the children reside . some states , however , have changed statutory language and no longer use terms such as legal custody , physical custody , and visitation . in those states , statutory language refers to the child residential schedule and parents decision making . this section of the chapter focuses on the residential schedule identified in parenting plans . before two thousand , much of the divorce literature suggested that very young children should not have overnight visits with their noncustodial parent until sometime between the ages of three and five . kelly and lamb were the first to identify the importance of regular overnight visits between very young children and their parents . this article led to some controversy , and in recent years , it has again been suggested that overnight visits may be harmful for some children . gould and stahl provided a framework in which to consider risks and benefits associated with overnight visits . most recently , ludolph and dale surveyed the attachment , fathering , and divorce research and concluded that , although attachment is one factor to consider when designing parenting plans for young children , other factors , including the history and nature of father involvement , quality of parenting by each parent , extent and type of conflict between the parents , regular day care that might be provided by third parties , and logistics , are relevant as well . if conducting a child custody evaluation where young children are at issue , it is critical to know this research . conflict , legal custody , and decision making . less research has focused on legal custody and decision making between parents than on residential schedules . for most parents , conflict decreases over time . in most circumstances , parents will share in the legal custody and decision making for their children , but there will be times when this is not feasible . typically , in families experiencing coercivecontrolling violence , in situations where mental illness and substance abuse impairs parenting , illness or substance abuse impairs parenting , and in those families in which parents dislike each other more than they love their children , it may be necessary to have decision making vested in one parent . when this is necessary , it is primarily so that decisions can be made in a timely and conflictfree way . parenting coordinators , who work with a family to help resolve conflicts on an ongoing basis , usually after there are court orders in place , may prove of value when certain highconflict dynamics exist . this process helps many families avoid frequent returns to court and enables decisions to be made for the benefit of children more efficiently . critical research in special issues . in addition to the basic research just described , many child custody evaluations involve special issues , including allegations of domestic violence , sexual abuse , children becoming alienated , and relocation . even more specialized knowledge is critical when performing evaluations in these areas . alienated children . first discussed by wallerstein and j . b . kelly as children who refused visitation with one parent , gardner described what he termed parental alienation syndrome , a phenomenon he described as occurring when a mother who harbored extremely negative feelings about the father influenced the child to reject the father . j . b . kelly and johnston discussed the alienated child and identified a range of factors that result in children becoming alienated from a parent . drozd and olesen took this is a step further when identifying the differences between children who are realistically estranged from one parent and those who have developed an unjustified alienation in rejecting that parent . more recently , a special issue of family court review was devoted to the topic of alienation with a special focus on intervention . domestic violence . with research suggesting that nearly half of all divorcing families experience some type of domestic violence , it is not surprising that many child custody evaluations involve such allegations . for many years , the domestic violence literature focused primarily on what has been termed intimate partner violence , and the child custody evaluation literature focused on risk assessments with these families . however , not all domestic violence involves the use of power and control as a primary dynamic such as is found in coercive controlling violence . in two thousand and seven , the afcc and the national council of juvenile and family court judges convened a symposium to discuss the differentiation of domestic violence cases and develop a recognition that one size does not fit all . this resulted in a more nuanced understanding of family violence and the range of parenting plan options appropriate for these different families . differentiation of types of domestic violence suggests that , in some families , violence is unique to the separation of the parents . in these cases , after violence occurs , parents are ashamed of their actions , readily admit to what they have done , and vow never again to engage in violent or abusive behavior . in other families , parents experience situational couples violence , in which neither parent is afraid of the other , both initiate the violence , and there is no evidence of power and control being utilized by either parent . in perhaps the smallest subset of families , but in the most serious of situations , the violence appears to be coercive and controlling in nature . in these coercivecontrolling violence families , it is most common for males to aggress , the victim and children are fearful in response to physical violence , and there is often cooccurring emotional abuse , sexual abuse , or control of family economics . sexual abuse . perhaps the most emotionally charged of cases are those in which there are allegations of child sexual abuse . the challenge in these cases is that the allegation usually sets in motion several events , including but not limited to : independent investigations by child protective services and law enforcement authorities . criminal charges . a temporary order suspending or supervising contact between the child and the alleged offender . emotionally charged court hearings in which the alleged offender denies the allegations and claims the allegations are made for purposes of custody and the other parent simply claiming protection of the child . a child custody evaluation designed to more fully evaluate the allegations and make recommendations for a parenting plan . kuehnle and connell focus on the range of hypotheses that must be considered in any case when such allegations are raised and the thoroughness of the evaluation process required . they also identify that the primary role of the evaluator is to perform a risk assessment in these cases . relocation evaluations . the one area where many judges and evaluators have the most trouble making decisions is in relocation cases , which pit the right of adults to live wherever they want and the right to parent . these cases come to the court when one parent wants to move with the child and the other parent opposes the move and wants the child to remain . child custody evaluators are at risk of confounding the research when performing these evaluations by recommending against moves because of research that demonstrates the benefit to children when both parents maintain ongoing and regular access with their children . there is limited research on the effect of parental relocation on children . college students reported greater current problems when they lived more than one hundred miles from their other parent during their childhood as a result of the relocation of either parent . drawing on other divorce research but in the absence of relocation research , some have suggested courts allow relocation by the primary custodial parent whereas others have suggested that courts should almost routinely order a provisional change of custody to the parent who is not relocating when the primary custodial parent wants to move . stahl has suggested that for the move or against the move biases operate in those circumstances and should not result in either of these presumptions . the primary focus in recent years has been on the consideration of risk and protective factors in determining the ultimate decision in these cases . some factors are likely to increase risks for children if they move . other factors will be protective and minimize risks for children if they move . some children who move are harmed while others are not . parkinson et al . wrote that , while it is tempting to resolve these difficult cases with the assistance of wishful thinking , research is needed to test that wishful thinking against the realities of experience . they do not believe there is ample research support to conclude that children who relocate with one parent while the other parent is left behind will , by virtue of the relocation , automatically do well or will be harmed . rather , the only way to understand the optimal relocation decision in a given case is by focusing on the risk and protective factors existing in that case . process of conducting custody and parenting evaluations . child custody and parenting evaluations are very different from other psychological or forensic evaluations . they are more complex , involve more people , and entail more procedures than most . these evaluations require a forensic mindset versus a therapeutic mindset and the exploration of multiple hypotheses . typically , there will be allegations made by one parent against the other , and it is not unusual for the evaluator to be unable to reach conclusions about the hesaid , shesaid allegations in the case . each step of the evaluation process is designed to help the evaluator gather information critical to understanding the family . this section addresses some of these critical issues . in most jurisdictions , a custody or parenting evaluation will be ordered by the court or stipulated to by the parties . it results in appointment of one neutral evaluator focused on assessing all relevant issues in dispute . from a risk management perspective , it is important to receive the court order before beginning the evaluation , as the authority to conduct the evaluation comes from the court . in many jurisdictions , the court order provides the evaluator with quasijudicial immunity and includes information helpful to determining the scope of the evaluation . additionally , the court order usually provides information about who is responsible for payment and identifies when the report is due , who is entitled to receive a copy , and the limits of confidentiality . after receiving the court order , it is common for the evaluator to have a joint conference call with the attorneys to gather basic information about the family and the reasons for the evaluation . although some attorneys like to argue their case for the evaluator , it is best to get some basic facts and reasons for the evaluation during this call and lay out the logistics and proposed time frame for the evaluation . during this call , it is helpful for the evaluator to explain procedures and request documents to be reviewed . the next step is scheduling initial appointments with the parents and sending them necessary paperwork , with copies to their attorneys . this paperwork is likely to include the retainer agreement and an intake form . as noted , the retainer agreement describes the evaluator and the parents obligations through the evaluation process , limitations regarding confidentiality , and other critical information about the evaluation process . it serves as a detailed informed consent document , which is recommended even if the parents have been ordered to participate in the evaluation . interviews with the parents . a good way to start the first evaluation interview with each parent is to ask the parent , why are we here ? this question allows the parent to explain his or her concerns , observations , beliefs , and allegations in a rather openended manner . with limited prompting , the evaluator can spend much of the first appointment trying to understand the parent issues , concerns , and proposed solutions . parents often have a need to be heard , and focusing on the matters important to them during the first interview facilitates cooperation and participation . during the interviews , it is important for the evaluator to focus on each parent : concerns and allegations . responses to the allegations and concerns raised by the other parent . understanding of the child and his or her psychological , social , academic , and developmental functioning . description of the history of the relationship between the child and each parent . description of his or her own family history , especially focusing on relevant issues that may relate to the current evaluation . beliefs about the strengths and weaknesses of his or her own and the other parent parenting . description of the coparenting relationship and the ability of each parent to communicate with the other and make day to day decisions on behalf of the children . history of and ability to support the child relationship with the other parent and if there are concerns about this moving forward . understanding of the special issues in the case and how it may affect a parenting plan . recommendation for the specific parenting plan . in most evaluations , this information can be gathered in three to four interviews , each of which might last two hours . it is important to gather the information that each parent wants to relay , but the examiner must be more than a stenographer and seek enough depth and breadth associated with these issues while simultaneously having an opportunity to ask each parent about the concerns raised by the other parent . in evaluations with more complex issues , the evaluator will want to explore those in depth . for example , in a case with allegations of domestic violence , it is important to understand the parents description of the history of conflict resolution , whether there are issues of power and control , and the parents description of physical , verbal , and emotional abuse that may have occurred . if a parent describes physical violence , it is important to ask about the first , most recent , and worst incidents of abuse . it is always important to explore for more than what the parent initially describes , since many domestic violence victims are reluctant to share details of the abuse . in cases with allegations of alienation , it is important to explore each parent history of involvement with the child , each parent perception of his or her own and the other parent contribution to the child being alienated , and the extent to which the child is rigid in his or her rejection of one parent . the evaluator should explore whether the child has a realistic basis for being estranged from one parent or whether other dynamics are contributing to this alienation . finally , in relocation cases , in addition to best interests statutes , it is important to understand specific statutory or case law pertaining to relocation . in some jurisdictions , there is a presumptive right to move by a custodial parent , whereas in other jurisdictions , the burden is on the parent requesting to relocate to show that the move is in the child best interests . in still other jurisdictions , every relocation matter is considered on a de novo basis . evaluators need to understand these statespecific legal issues in relocation matters . when interviewing parents in relocation cases , evaluators must : ask questions to understand the motives for relocation and the motives for opposing it . understand how each parent perceives the child will be affected by the move , both positively and negatively . collect family information to understand the social capital in each community . gather information from each parent about a proposed parenting plan should the court allow the move , or should the court not allow the move , or should both parents end up in the same location . interviews with the children . interviews with the children are a crucial part of understanding both the family dynamics and the relationship between the child and his or her parents . evaluators should : start by establishing rapport with the children . begin by discussing the process of the evaluation , the limits of confidentiality , and the structure of the interview process . encourage children to talk openly about their feelings and help them understand that the evaluation is about their interests and not their parents wishes . inform the children that a report will be submitted to the judge , which the parents will probably read . tell children that they do not have to answer questions they do not want to answer and that their parents or the judge will ultimately decide where and how they will spend time with their parents . evaluators must recognize that children language skills are not the same as adults . it is important to know that , although children often do not understand their questions , they may respond as if they do . it may be useful to ask children to repeat or to explain the questions to be sure that they understand them . how questions are asked affects the way answers are given . when interviewing children , particularly in a forensic context , it is vital to ask openended questions . these questions are far more likely to yield useful , accurate , and honest responses . asking leading or categorical questions limits the way that the child responds and , therefore , limits the usefulness and validity of those responses . it is important for the evaluation process to be balanced . as such , it is also important for children to be seen with each parent bringing them to the office . evaluators must keep in mind that one or both parents may influence their children . to reduce the risks associated with this influence , appointments should be scheduled equally with each parent bringing the children to the appointments . although children suggestibility and the potential for being influenced by parents or siblings is a topic that is beyond the scope of this chapter , it is critical for those evaluating custody and parenting plans to understand this research . specific data are important to gather during interviews with children . these include the child : likes and dislikes , interests , friends , chosen activities , and other aspects of the child day to day life . schooling , including information about how each parent participates in helping with homework and other schoolrelated matters . perceptions of his or her relationships with each parent , including things that the child likes and does not like about each parent . perceptions of discipline . routines in each home and how the child deals with any differences in routines between homes . typical mood , and how the child typically expresses his or her feelings and if there is a difference for each parent . perceptions about the need to care for his or her parents emotionally . anything else the child wants the judge to know . these data provide important information to the court about the child life . because the evaluator is the only unbiased person providing information to the judge about the child , such information is vital to the court in helping it to make the ultimate decision about custody and parenting plans . observing parents and children together . a fundamental purpose for observing children is to understand the nature of the bond between a child and the parents . although there is no reliable and valid way of measuring whether a child is more bonded to one parent or the other , the job of the evaluator is to describe the behavioral dynamics of the bond for the judge . in young children , the evaluator should observe the way children and parents relate with one another . do they play together , smile and laugh with one another , exchange affection with one another , or stay relatively distant and isolated from one another ? does the child seem attentive to the parent when the parent enters the room , or does the child seem disinterested ? when parents are in the room , it is important to listen to what they say . parents may want to talk about things that are inappropriate to discuss in front of the child , because they have a need to provide more information to the examiner . the observation session is not a good time for this so it is always important for evaluators to understand each parent ability to utilize adequate boundaries and keep the child free from anxiety . if the parent offers inappropriate comments in front of the child , the examiner should try to understand how the child feels about it , responds to it , and interacts with the parent about it . for example , some children get into arguments with their parents about things that parents say , and this provides valuable information about the interaction between parent and child . it is often helpful to provide tasks for the parent and child to complete . encouraging a father and daughter to draw a picture , for example , will provide data about how they work together to complete a task . are they cooperative , are they playful , do they use each other assistance , or do they become quite competitive with one another ? this can help the evaluator develop hypotheses about the child relationship with the parent , which will need to be verified in other ways . unstructured play , in which the child initiates an activity of his or her choosing , provides an opportunity to see how responsive the parent is to the child in his or her space . many parents can interact quite well with their children when they choose the activity , but they may feel awkward and insecure when their children choose the activity . at the same time , the examiner must observe the affect of the parents and children . are they relaxed and having fun , or is there tension between the parent and child just as there is between the parents ? finally , with older children and their parents , it is important to talk about the routines , day to day life in each parent home , and how they and their parents deal with conflicts . examiners should pay particular attention to disparities between what the child says during individual interviews compared with the observation sessions . it is particularly important to explore a range of feelings between the child and parents in those families where alienation or estrangement is alleged . psychological testing and parenting questionnaires . use of psychological testing in custody evaluations , although common , is not mandatory . no psychological tests measure the quality of parenting or coparenting , which are critical issues in child custody and parenting evaluations . there are also no valid psychological tests designed for use with the specific child custody population . although there have been efforts to develop some psychological instruments relevant to child custody , these instruments are of limited validity . the most recent effort to develop an instrument to understand children views of their relationships , the structured child assessment of relationships in families , does not have sufficient validity and reliability , although research on this instrument is ongoing . thus , no specific instruments can directly assess the complex issues inherent in these evaluations . the afcc model standards direct child custody evaluators to be prepared to articulate the bases for selecting the specific instruments used and to use assessment instruments for the purpose for which they have been validated . the model standards add that aution should be exercised . when utilizing computer generated interpretive reports and prescriptive texts , interpretive reports or prescriptive texts . according to the apa guidelines for child custody evaluations , psychologists strive to interpret assessment data in a manner consistent with the context of the evaluation . these standards and guidelines suggest that child custody and parenting evaluators must be careful in choosing assessment instruments , understand the research associated with custody litigants and their scores on various measures , and be careful when using computergenerated interpretive reports . if a psychologist quotes from a computergenerated interpretive report , he or she should identify it as a quote and provide the citation . psychologists regularly administer psychological testing as part of a comprehensive , multimethod process of child custody evaluation . the minnesota multiphasic personality twonventory2 is the most commonly utilized psychological test administered to parents . other commonly administered psychological tests include the personality assessment inventory , the rorschach inkblot test , and the millon clinical multiaxial inventory . there is considerable controversy about using either the mcmiiii or rorschach in child custody work . examiners should be aware of the controversies and arguments on both sides of the issues when choosing to use those particular instruments , as presented in balanced reviews by craig , dyer , erard , and evans and schutz . finally , psychological test instruments should be used in a forensically informed manner . unlike the use of psychological tests in therapeutic settings , where the goal is to aid in diagnosis and treatment , tests in child custody and parenting evaluations should be informed by the forensic questions that guide the evaluation . questions pertaining to each parent general psychological and behavioral functioning , as it relates to their functional parenting and coparenting capacities , are common reasons for utilizing tests in parenting evaluations . the test data should be used to develop hypotheses about the parent psychological and behavioral functioning specifically in terms of how it relates to parenting and abilities to implement a parenting plan . for example , if test data revealed clinical elevations on a scale that measures psychological turmoil , the evaluator might hypothesize that the parent is reacting to a difficult divorce , and if this hypothesis was confirmed by other data gathered during the evaluation , the impact on parenting might be deemed minimal and temporary . alternatively , it might be hypothesized that the parent has chronic and pervasive deficits in mood regulation , which would pose more serious concerns with respect to parenting and coparenting . the hypotheses generated are evaluated against other data from the evaluation to either confirm or disconfirm those hypotheses . it is also common to administer some type of parenting questionnaires or instruments to gauge a parent stress , measure each parent selfreport about his or her relationship with the child , and gather structured information about the child . it is important to recognize that these instruments are not definitive but also may provide useful hypotheses about the parents and their observations of their child . review of collateral information . collateral information falls within two major categories . first , the evaluator will review relevant pleadings , declarations , and other court documents that the attorneys submit . although these documents are not intended to bring truth to the case , they do provide a framework from which to understand each parent perspectives and concerns . evaluators must review all materials submitted , though the evaluator can set a deadline as to when materials must be submitted so the evaluation can be completed on time as required by the court . the second type of collateral information comes from third parties who have relevant information about one or more family members . collateral data can include information gathered from friends , relatives , babysitters , teachers , pediatricians , psychotherapists , and others . the child custody evaluator looks for convergent and divergent data between collateral and other data to help in understanding the various allegations and assertions made by the parties . collateral information can be gathered verbally as well as in writing , with the use of questionnaires and letters , or by a review of affidavits or other written statements of the parties . the benefits of gathering collateral information are listed next . evaluators need to have a mindset of disconfirmation rather than confirmation . reviewing collateral information and talking with collateral sources allows for that . parents in the midst of a custody dispute tend to present themselves in the most favorable light and the other parent more negatively . collateral data can help balance this defensiveness and positive impression management by the parents . collateral data may include information about parents and children that can not be obtained through clinical interview , parents or children that can not be obtained through clinical interview , testing , and observation . collateral data can help verify or refute claims made by the parents or others . the afcc model standards provide specific direction for the gathering of collateral data : evaluators shall be mindful of the importance of gathering information from multiple sources in order to thoroughly explore alternative hypotheses concerning issues pertinent to the evaluation . evaluators shall recognize the importance of securing information from collateral sources who , in the judgment of the evaluators , are likely to have access to salient and critical data . when assessing the reports of participants in the evaluation , evaluators shall seek from other sources information that may serve either to confirm or disconfirm participant reports on any salient issue , unless doing so is not feasible . in utilizing collateral sources , evaluators shall seek information that will facilitate the confirmation or disconfirmation of hypotheses under consideration . all collateral sources contacted shall be disclosed by the child custody evaluator . austin recommended that child custody evaluators use a concentric circle approach for gathering collateral data . he identified that there are people who are close to the family who will have the richest and most complete information about family members . at the same time , these persons are likely to be the most biased and to take sides in the dispute . in the second , broader circle are professionals such as teachers , day care professionals , pediatricians , and therapists who may have considerable information about the family but only within the narrow areas of knowledge that they experience family members . many of these persons may also be biased in favor of one parent . in the outermost circle are those few people who may know very little about the family but may have very specific information about an event or some particular parent child information . this may include someone at the school who overhears an argument between a parent and the child teacher . these persons may have very critical information about a specific event that was witnessed but know absolutely nothing else about any of the family members . typically , the court order appointing a child custody evaluator allows the evaluator to speak with any thirdparty collateral sources chosen , even without the expressed permission of either parent . authorization from parents is required before speaking with professional collateral sources , such as teachers , therapists , and physicians . evaluators must obtain the consent of the collateral witness to be part of the evaluation process and provide the same information about the limitations to confidentiality to all thirdparty collaterals , some of whom may not want to speak with an evaluator if they know that their comments are going to be included in a report to the court and read by the parents . as stated in the afcc model standards , evaluators shall provide potential collateral informants with written information that shall include an unambiguous statement concerning the lack of confidentiality in a forensic mental health evaluation . applying psychology to civil proceedings . critical issues in report writing . in any presentation of findings , the evaluator must : summarize the datagathering procedures , information sources , and time spent , and present all relevant information , including information that does not support the conclusions reached ; describe any limitations in the evaluation that result from unobtainable information , failure of a party to cooperate , or the circumstances of particular interviews ; only make a custody or visitation recommendation for a party who has been evaluated . this requirement does not preclude the evaluator from making an interim recommendation that is in the best interest of the child ; and provide clear , detailed recommendations that are consistent with the health , safety , welfare , and best interest of the child if making any recommendations to the court regarding a parenting plan . although this rule is mandatory only for california child custody evaluators , these suggestions are useful for evaluators in any jurisdiction . the specialty guidelines state : consistent with relevant law and rules of evidence , when providing professional reports and other sworn statements or testimony , forensic practitioners strive to offer a complete statement of all relevant opinions that they formed within the scope of their work on the case , the basis and reasoning underlying the opinions , the salient data or other information that was considered in forming the opinions , and an indication of any additional evidence that may be used in support of the opinions to be offered . the specific substance of forensic reports is determined by the type of psycholegal issue at hand as well as relevant laws or rules in the jurisdiction in which the work is completed . the specialty guidelines also instruct the forensic evaluator to disclose data and information that is not supportive of or contrary to the conclusions and recommendations offered by the evaluator . procedures . based on the need to demonstrate balance and neutrality and to help the court understand that the evaluation process was thorough , the evaluator must explain all procedures and describe the length of appointments and the place where interviews and observations occurred . materials reviewed must be described , and all collaterals who were interviewed must be listed . if certain procedures could not be completed , such as a stepparent who refused to be interviewed or a collateral witness who would not return phone calls , this should be described . if there was some reason that procedures were not balanced , this discrepancy should be explained . this thorough description of procedures helps reduce the risk that someone might perceive the evaluation and report as biased . each parent . the evaluator must provide complete and relevant information about each parent . among other things , the data included in this section of the report should include each parent : concerns and allegations . responses to the other parent stated significant concerns . description of the children , the children functioning , and needs . relevant history and psychological functioning . parenting style and strengths and weaknesses . description of the coparenting relationship and each parent contribution to the coparenting difficulties . desired custodial outcome and reasons for that . in addition , this section should include each parent relevant details about any special issues . for example , in a relocation evaluation , it will be important for the evaluator to explain each parent motives for moving or opposing the move , thoughts about how the move might be positive or harmful for the child , and other important relocationrelated data . children . the report should provide thorough and relevant information about each child . the examiner must keep in mind that this is likely to be the only opportunity the court will have to gain a truly objective perspective of the children and their adjustment . among other things , the data should include information about each child : developmental , social , psychological , academic , and social functioning , including interests , friendships , temperament and typical mood . relationship history with each parent . thoughts about each parent . feelings about a range of things , including the parents divorce and their behaviors as divorced parents . applying psychology to civil proceedings . exposure to parental conflicts , and the extent to which the child feels alienated or justifiably estranged from one parent , or the extent to which the child feels alienated or justifiably estranged from one parent . perspective of each parent caretaking and how each parent disciplines the child . opinion about the parenting plan , if expressed . collateral information . the evaluator must present information obtained from collateral sources and indicate whether this information was obtained in writing or verbally . data about why the collateral informant information was included in the data set , the nature and type of relationship the collateral informant has with the parties and children , with the parties or children , and if relevant , the attitude of the collateral informant about participating in the evaluation should be provided . a common complaint of parents is that the evaluator misrepresented what collateral informants offered . for this reason , it may be useful to review with the collateral informant the information to be included in the report and include a statement from each collateral witness confirming the information in the report , report or include a statement from each collateral witness confirming the information in the report . the analysis section is the most important component of the report . rather than a review of information already described , the analysis section should focus on those data that lead to the expert opinions . in the analysis section , it is also important to discuss data that may not be consistent with the examiner expert opinions or recommendations . just as in math class , here it is important to show your work and explain the bases for all conclusions . it is important to detail the basis for any expert opinions reached . the analysis section should reflect that the evaluator considered each parent concerns and responses to the other parent concerns . it is important that those data are integrated with the psycholegal issues of concern to the court . given that , in most evaluations , there is a range of custodial options , it is important for the evaluator to provide a thorough riskbenefit analysis of each custodial option and those data that support his or her conclusions . for example , in a typical case , the evaluator should explain the risks and benefits of primary mother custody , primary father custody , and shared custody and the risks and benefits associated with substantial versus equal time with each parent . in a relocation case , the examiner should explain the risks and benefits of primary mother custody in location x as opposed to the risks and benefits of primary father custody in location . finally , in all cases , the evaluator should explain the risks and benefits of shared decision making as opposed to some other plan that may give one parent decisions in certain areas of the child life or perhaps even utilizing a parenting coordinator . in some cases , it might be best to provide the court with detailed parenting plans reflecting different options rather than a single recommended parenting plan . in such a case , the evaluator should detail the risks and benefits of each potential parenting plan in the report . finally , and most important , it is critical to present both the data that support the conclusions as well as the data that do not support the conclusions . recommendations . in recent years , there has been a renewed debate about whether examiners should make recommendations about the ultimate issue in child custody cases . judges typically prefer recommendations , and therefore it remains the custom of evaluators to provide them . nevertheless , it is clearly the judge job to make orders based on all of the evidence at trial rather than simply rubberstamping the recommendations of a child custody evaluator . family law judges use the evaluator recommendations as a starting place , not an end point , and they assess the usefulness of the evaluator recommendations based on the consistency with other evidence presented at trial as well as the forensic integrity and quality of the evaluator work product . stahl suggested that , when one or more best interests or protective factors would suggest in favor of the child relocation and one or more best interests or risk factors would suggest against the child relocation , the evaluator should not weigh the various factors ; this is the judge job . instead , in such situations , the evaluator should provide those conclusions to the court and provide multiple recommendations , with the ultimate decision based on the judge weighting of the various best interests , risk , and protective factors . in addition to the ultimate issue of parenting time , it is common in child custody evaluations to make recommendations in these areas : legal custody and decision making , legal custody or decision making . interventions , including counseling for either parent and the children , parent or the children , identifying the suggested goals for that counseling . substance abuse or domestic violence related interventions , if relevant . alternative dispute resolution for ongoing issues . any other recommendations relevant to the family that was evaluated . child custody evaluations are complex and require integrating disparate information gathered from a variety of participants and information of various types with disparate characteristics . like a jigsaw puzzle , child custody evaluations require a persistent attitude of gathering more information , not only to confirm but also to disconfirm various hypotheses , until things fall into place . evaluators need to avoid acting like stenographers and maintain a style of curiosity , always gathering additional relevant information until complex issues are understood . to be an effective evaluator , one must develop a thick skin , because one or both parents are likely to be upset with the recommendations . in some jurisdictions , it is not uncommon for parents to file licensing complaints alleging bias or unprofessional behavior regardless of how thorough and professional the evaluation is . indeed , the child custody evaluator carries more risk for licensing complaints than any other role played by the professional psychologist . finally , if a case goes to trial , it is possible that one or both attorneys might hire a consultant or testifying expert who might criticize some of the work . in spite of the risks and difficulties , conducting child custody evaluations can be professionally rewarding and satisfying . a child custody evaluator provides a beneficial service for family law judges that can help them understand the complexities of the most conflicted families they serve . child custody evaluations can provide guidance for families who can settle their dispute and move forward following a welldone evaluation . because child custody evaluators work in an interdisciplinary field , opportunities for ongoing learning and professional development are ever present . most important , child custody evaluators keep the focus on the best interests of the children and therefore help them and their parents to adjust to the change in their lives as they develop healthier and more adaptive ways of moving forward . 