assessing competency to stand trial . competency to stand trial is a concept of jurisprudence allowing the postponement of criminal proceedings for those defendants who are unable to participate in their defense on account of mental disease or intellectual disability . because trial competency issues are raised substantially more often than the insanity defense , psychologists involved in forensic assessment and consultation are likely to have more experience with competency evaluations than those of criminal responsibility . estimates are that approximately sixty competency evaluations are conducted in the united states annually . this number has increased substantially from estimates in nineteen ninety seven that placed the annual number of competency evaluations between twenty five and thirty nine . in this chapter , we present an overview of competency laws , research , and methods of assessment , with the aim of providing forensic psychologists with the basic information necessary to conduct competency evaluations . we do not believe , however , that this chapter will sufficiently prepare a novice forensic psychologist to carry out such evaluations . the issues surrounding competency determinations are highly complex ; therefore , an evaluator needs not only a high level of clinical knowledge and skill but also a sophisticated knowledge of the legal system . we urge readers interested in pursuing work in the competency arena to supplement this chapter with additional sources as well as workshops and other forms of continuing education . the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology also contain discussions relevant to competency evaluations . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . defining competency . provisions allowing for a delay of trial because a defendant was incompetent to proceed have long been a part of the judicial system due process standards . english common law allowed for an arraignment , trial , judgment or execution of an alleged capital offender to be stayed if he or she be absolutely mad . over time , statutes that have been created in the united states and canada have further defined and extended the common law practice . the modern standard in the united states was established in dusky united states . although the wording differs across jurisdictions , all states use a variant of the dusky standard to define competency . in dusky , the supreme court held : it is not enough for the district judge to find that the defendant is oriented to time and place and has some recollection of events , but that the test must be whether he has sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding and whether he has a rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him . while the concept of competency to stand trial has been long established in law , ambiguities in the wording of dusky raise a number of questions . what is meant by sufficient present ability ? how does one determine whether a defendant has a rational as well as factual understanding ? to be sure , some courts and legislatures have provided some direction to evaluators in the form of articulated dusky standards , but the forensic evaluator is left largely unguided except by a common principle , that evaluators can not reach a finding of incompetency independent of the facts of the legal case . the problem in defining and assessing competency leads to a broad range of interpretations of the dusky standard . because the courts and legislatures have given mental health professionals a large share of the responsibility for defining and evaluating competency , it should not be surprising to find that mental status issues , such as presence or absence of psychosis , traditionally have played a dominant role in the findings of evaluators . historically , in fact , evaluators initially equated psychosis with incompetency . furthermore , evaluators in the past rarely took into account the specific demands of a defendant case . practice standards are more clearly delineated at present , and , as a result , practice in this area continues to improve . in the past , evaluators typically were employed in state psychiatric hospital settings and were not formally trained in the assessment of competency or in matters of the law . as a consequence , the evaluations were based on the same standard mental status examinations that had been used with other patients in the hospital . psychological tests were rarely used ; if they were employed , they were utilized as a diagnostic tool to determine the presence or absence of psychosis . over the past thirty five years , these practices have been challenged and improved based on empirical research findings . for example , research has provided evidence that the presence of psychosis was not sufficient by itself for a finding of incompetency , and modern empirical studies of competency reports have demonstrated that evaluators rarely make that simple conceptual error . nevertheless , although forensic evaluators today typically have more training than those in the past , most states still do not require specific training of mental health professionals who conduct such evaluations . the specific psycholegal abilities required of a defendant are the most important aspect of assessing fitness . the contextual nature of competence has been explored . some researchers and scholars have argued that competence should be considered within the context in which it is to be used . for instance , the abilities required by the defendant in his or her specific case should be taken into account when assessing competence . this contextual perspective was summarized by golding and roesch : mere presence of severe disturbance is only a threshold issue it must be further demonstrated that such severe disturbance in this defendant , facing these charges , in light of existing evidence , anticipating the substantial effort of a particular attorney with a relationship of known characteristics , results in the defendant being unable to rationally assist the attorney or to comprehend the nature of the proceedings and their likely outcome . the importance of a contextual determination of specific psycholegal abilities has been repeatedly demonstrated by empirical findings that abilities in one area of functioning are rarely homogenous with those in other areas of functioning . supreme court decisions in both the united states and canada , however , have confused this issue by finding that the standard by which competency to be judged is not contextspecific . in regina whittle , the supreme court of canada ruled that there is to be only one standard for competency regardless of the specific abilities to be performed by the accused . that court concluded that there is no difference between the essential abilities needed in making active choices about waiving counsel , making decisions at trial , confessing , or pleading guilty . it ruled that different standards of competency should not be applied for different aspects of criminal proceedings and that the test to be used is one of limited cognitive capacity in each of these circumstances . however , unlike in godinez moran , the forensic examiners had actually evaluated mr . whittle in these specific contexts , regardless of whether the standard to be applied was the same or different as a function of the context . in godinez moran , the united states supreme court held similarly that the standard for the various types of competency should be considered the same . justice thomas wrote for the majority : the standard adopted by the ninth circuit is whether a defendant who seeks to plead guilty or waive counsel has the capacity for reasoned choice among the alternatives available to him . how this standard is different from the dusky standard whether the defendant has a rational understanding of the proceedings is not readily apparent to us . while the decision to plead guilty is undeniably a profound one , it is no more complicated than the sum total of decisions that a defendant may be called upon to make during the course of a trial . nor do we think that a defendant who waives his right to the assistance of counsel must be more competent than the defendant who does not , since there is no reason to believe that the decision to waive counsel requires an appreciably higher level of mental functioning than the decision to waive other constitutional rights . in his dissent , justice blackmun noted that the majority analysis is contrary to both common sense and longstanding case law and reasoned that competency can not be considered in a vacuum , separate from its specific legal context . justice blackmun argued that competency for one purpose does not necessarily translate to competency for another purpose and noted that previous supreme court cases required competency evaluations to be specifically tailored to the context and purpose of a proceeding . what is missing from the majority opinion in godinez , however , is that , unlike the circumstances in whittle , moran competency to waive counsel or plead guilty to death penalty murder charges was never assessed by the forensic examiners , regardless of which standard was employed . the godinez holding has been subsequently criticized by legal scholars and courts alike . in the words of the third circuit court of appeals , this difficult case presents us with a window through which to view the real world effects of the supreme court decision in godinez moran , and it is not a pretty sight . the problem is not whether the standards for various psycholegal competencies are higher , different , or the same , but rather , more fundamentally , whether the defendant has been examined with respect to these issues in the first place . a single standard for competency to stand trial was a basis for finding colin ferguson , a man accused of murdering six people and injuring nineteen others on the long island rail road in nineteen ninety three , competent to waive counsel and represent himself . his lawyers intended to raise the insanity defense , but ferguson objected and requested that he represent himself . since he had been found competent to stand trial , the trial court allowed him to represent himself , or proceed pro se . the bizarre nature of the trial , in which ferguson crossexamined the police who arrested him as well as some victims , led perlin to comment that the proceedings were a charade , and he concluded that the godinez decision resulted in a trial in which dignity , a prerequisite of a fair trial , was not preserved . subsequently , the united states supreme court , in indiana edwards , addressed the issue of whether there should be a different standard for competence to stand trial and competence to represent oneself . ahmad edwards , who was diagnosed with schizophrenia , attempted to steal a pair of shoes from a department store in indiana , and , when security officers tried to apprehend him , he opened fire . he was subsequently charged with attempted murder , battery with a deadly weapon , criminal recklessness , and theft . in two thousand , he was found incompetent to stand trial and remanded for treatment . he was restored to competency after seven months ; however , his attorneys requested a second evaluation in two thousand and two , whereby he was found competent . in two thousand and three , his attorneys requested a third evaluation , which resulted in a finding of incompetence . his competence was restored once again and he proceeded with adjudication . in two thousand and five , when his trial was set to begin , edwards asked to proceed pro se . the trial judge denied the request . edwards proceeded with appointed counsel and ultimately was convicted of the attempted murder and battery charges . the case carried through the appeals process and eventually was heard by the united states supreme court , which held that the constitution does not prevent states from requiring counsel for those found competent to stand trial but who are not deemed competent to proceed pro se . the court addressed its earlier decision in godinez in the ruling but indicated that it did not provide direction in this case because the defendant ability to conduct a defense at trial was not an issue at hand in godinez and because the holding allows a state to permit a questionably competent defendant to proceed pro se , but it did not indicate whether a state may deny such a defendant . standards of competence are one area of inquiry , whereas the conceptualization of competence is another . some researchers and scholars have provided reconceptualizations of competence to stand trial . winick cogently argued that , in some circumstances , it might be in the best interests of the defendant to proceed with a trial even if he or she is incompetent . he postulated that this could take the form of a provisional trial wherein the support of the defense attorney would serve to ensure protection of the defendant . this would allow the defendant to proceed with his or her case while maintaining decorum in the courtroom and respecting the defendant constitutional rights . bonnie also set forth a reformulation of competence to stand trial . he proposed a distinction between two types of competencies : competence to assist counsel and decisional competence . he argued that defendants found incompetent to assist counsel should be barred from proceeding until they were restored to competence , whereas defendants found decisionally incompetent could proceed in certain cases in which their lawyers were able to present a defense . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . another major change has been the shift in the type of settings in which competency assessments are conducted . roesch and golding argued that inpatient evaluations are unnecessary in all but perhaps a small percentage of cases , because most determinations of competency can easily be made on the basis of brief screening interviews . communitybased settings , including jails and mental health centers , are increasingly used to conduct evaluations . in nineteen ninety four , grisso , coccozza , steadman , fisher , and greer published the results of a national survey they had conducted to determine the organization of pretrial forensic evaluation services in the united states . they concluded that the traditional use of centrally located , inpatient facilities for obtaining pretrial evaluations survives in only a minority of states , having been replaced by other models that employ various types of outpatient approaches . one compelling reason for this shift is cost . in nineteen seventy seven , laben , kashgarian , nessa , and spencer estimated that the cost of the communitybased evaluations they conducted in tennessee was onethird of the cost of institutionbased evaluations . in nineteen eighty five , winick estimated that $ one hundred and eighty five million was spent annually on competency evaluations ; however , more recent estimates are two or three times higher and probably reach $ one billion if the costs associated with the entire competency evaluation and treatment process are considered . for instance , in two thousand , bonnie and grisso estimated that approximately sixty competency evaluations were performed each year . blending communityand institutionbased evaluations , a typical evaluation cost is $ five per defendant ; thus , approximately $ three hundred million may be spent annually on competency evaluations . if twenty percent of examined defendants are adjudicated incompetent , there are twelve restoration commitments yearly . in a typical jurisdiction , the average cost of a year in a forensic institution is $ one hundred and forty five ; thus , a conservative estimate of restoration costs per defendant would be $ thirty six for a threemonth period , bringing the annual restoration total to approximately $ four hundred and thirty five million . therefore , it appears that a conservative estimate of evaluation and restoration costs in the united states is upward of $ seven hundred million annually . widespread use of screening instruments would serve to lower these costs , because the majority of individuals for whom competence is clearly not an issue would be screened out . only those defendants whom the screening instrument has identified as potentially incompetent would then be referred for a more indepth assessment . screening instruments can be administered in communitybased settings as well as in local jails or courthouses , thereby also serving to eliminate the unnecessary detention of clearly competent individuals . base rates for competency referrals and for incompetency determinations vary widely across jurisdictions and evaluation settings . this occurs for a number of reasons , including variations in examiner training and the use of forensically relevant evaluation procedures ; differences in the application of standards by examiners ; the availability of pretrial mental health services ; the nature of the referral system ; inadequate treatment services for the chronically mentally ill and criminalization of their conduct ; and the extent to which judges scrutinize bona fide doubt about a defendant competency before granting evaluation petitions . nevertheless , a metaanalysis of sixty eight studies reported a base rate of incompetence of twenty seven percent . precise data are not available , but conservatively , half of those found competent presented little or no reason for doubting their competency and could have been detected by adequate screening procedures . this is true in the united states as well as in other countries . zapf and roesch investigated the rate of incompetence in individuals remanded to an inpatient setting for an assessment of fitness to stand trial in canada . their results indicated that only eleven percent of the remands were unfit to stand trial and , further , that with the use of a brief screening interview , eighty two percent of the remands could have been screened out at some earlier time because they were clearly fit to stand trial . many of the assessment procedures we describe later in this chapter are either explicitly designed for screening or could easily be adapted for use in such settings . a number of instruments designed to assess competence have been developed over the past fifty years . this work was pioneered by mcgarry and his colleagues and served as the starting point for a more sophisticated and systematic approach to the assessment of competency . in nineteen eighty six , grisso coined the term forensic assessment instrument to describe instruments that provide the framework for conducting forensic assessments . fais are measures designed to evaluate psycholegal abilities rather than the psychological constructs measured by traditional psychological tests . fais make forensic assessments more systematic and assist evaluators in collecting important and relevant information by following the decisionmaking process required under the law . since the term was coined , a number of assessment instruments have been developed that are designed to work in this way , and it appears that the use of fais has been increasing . this trend is encouraging in that empirical data suggest that trained examiners using fais achieve the highest levels of interexaminer and examineradjudication agreement . before turning to a review of specific assessment methods , we provide a brief overview of the legal procedures involved in competencybased questions . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . laws regarding competency vary from state to state , although most jurisdictions follow procedures similar to the overview we describe in this section . clinicians should consult the statute for the specific law and procedures applicable in their state . the issue of competency may be raised at any point in the adjudication process . if a court determines that a bona fide doubt exists as to a defendant competency , it must consider this issue formally , usually via a forensic evaluation , which can take place , as noted , while the defendant is in the community , in jail , or in another institutional setting . one legal issue that may concern evaluators is whether information obtained in a competency evaluation can be used against a defendant during the guilt phase of a trial or at sentencing . although concerns regarding selfincrimination have been raised , all jurisdictions in the united states and canada provide , either statutorily or through case law , that information obtained in a competency evaluation can not be used in the context of a defendant guilt unless the defendant places his or her mental state into evidence at either the trial or the sentencing hearings . once a competency evaluation has been completed and the written report has been submitted , the court may schedule a hearing . if both defense and prosecution accept the findings and recommendations in the report , however , a hearing does not have to take place . as such , it is likely that , in the majority of cases , a formal hearing is not held . if a hearing is held , the evaluators may be asked to testify , but most hearings are quite brief , and usually only the written report of an evaluator is used . the ultimate decision about competency rests with the court , which is not bound by the evaluators recommendations . in most cases , however , the court accepts the recommendations of the evaluators . at this point , defendants adjudicated competent proceed with their cases . for defendants found incompetent , their trials are postponed until their competency is regained or the charges are dismissed , usually without prejudice . the disposition of incompetent defendants is perhaps the most problematic aspect of this area of law . until the case of jackson indiana , virtually all states allowed for the automatic and indefinite commitment of incompetent defendants . in jackson , however , the united states supreme court held that defendants committed solely on the basis of incompetency can not be held more than the reasonable period of time necessary to determine whether there is a substantial probability that he will attain that capacity in the foreseeable future . the court did not specify how long a period of time would be reasonable , nor did it indicate how progress toward the goal of regaining competency could be assessed . the jackson decision led to revisions in state statutes that provided alternatives to commitment and limited the length of commitment . the duration of confinement varies from state to state ; some states have specific time limits while others are based on a proportion of the length of sentence that would have been given if the defendant were convicted . medication is the most common form of treatment provided to restore defendants competence , although some jurisdictions have established psychoeducational programs designed to increase defendants understanding of the legal process or to confront problems that hinder a defendant ability to participate in the defense . what happens if an incompetent defendant refuses treatment , particularly medications ? the united states supreme court case provided at least a partial answer to this question . in sell united states , the supreme court considered the case of charles sell , a dentist who was charged with multiple counts of insurance fraud and who was deemed incompetent and committed for treatment at a federal medical center . sell refused medication , and the treatment staff subsequently sought to have him involuntarily medicated . the medical center review panels concluded that sell was mentally ill and dangerous , that medication would be helpful in reducing his symptoms , and that medication would also help restore his competence to stand trial . sell appealed , and the federal magistrate who had ordered sell commitment supported the government position that medication was the best treatment alternative to address the issue of his dangerousness and also to restore his competency . the supreme court held that antipsychotic drugs could be administered against a defendant will for the purpose of restoring competency , but only in limited circumstances . the court noted that this applied only to the issue of competency restoration , and indicated that medication could be justified on other grounds , including dangerousness . writing for the majority , justice breyer identified several factors that must be satisfied before a defendant can be involuntarily medicated . these include a determination that the medication is likely to restore competence but will not result in side effects that might affect a defendant ability to assist counsel . the court must also find that alternative and less intrusive methods that would achieve the same result are not available . the sell decision may have limited the use of medication as an option for some incompetent defendants who refuse voluntary treatment . indeed , justice breyer commented that he thought that instances of forced medication might be rare . as a consequence , the sell case may result in a greater emphasis being placed on the development of alternative forms of treatment for restoring competence . nevertheless , cochrane and his colleagues conducted a retrospective records review of all incompetent defendants who were involuntarily treated under sell in the united states federal court system between two thousand and three and two thousand and nine . they found that seventy nine percent of those diagnosed with a psychotic disorder responded well to treatment and ultimately were deemed competent to stand trial . this brief overview of competency procedures is intended to provide a basic understanding of the process . for a more comprehensive discussion of the legal issues involved and a review of empirical research on the various aspects of the competency procedures , the reader is referred to reviews by pirelli , gottdiener , and zapf and by zapf and roesch . assessing competency . although there has been some confusion over the definition of the term competency , there is generally a high level of agreement among evaluators regarding a defendant competence . researchers who have investigated interrater reliability generally report that pairs of evaluators agree in up to eighty percent or more of the cases . gowensmith , murrie , and boccaccini published findings from a study conducted with a sample of two hundred and sixteen hawaiian cases and found slightly lower agreement rates ; they found seventy one percent agreement among examiners in initial competency evaluations and sixty one percent agreement in cases pertaining to competency restoration . murrie and colleagues found great variability in levels of agreement , which they attributed to evaluator , system , and policylevel factors . when evaluators are highly trained and use semistructured competence assessment instruments , however , high rates of agreement have been reported . when base rates of findings of competency are considered , these high levels of agreement are less impressive , and they do not suggest that evaluators are necessarily in agreement about the specific criteria involved in a determination of competency . in their recently published metaanalysis , pirelli , gottdiener , and zapf found the base rate of incompetency to be twenty seven percent in a total sample of over twenty pretrial defendants referred for such evaluations . thus , examiners , without even directly assessing a group of defendants , could achieve high levels of agreement with an examining clinician simply by deeming all defendants competent . because in most jurisdictions more than seventy percent of all referred defendants are adjudicated competent , the psychologist and the examiner would achieve at least modest agreement , even without making any further decisions . skeem and her colleagues demonstrated that examiner agreement on specific psycholegal deficits averaged only twenty five percent across a series of competency domains . it is the more difficult decisions , involving cases where competency is truly a serious question , that are of greatest concern . how reliable are decisions about these cases ? one study used a vignette methodology to determine whether examiners would distinguish between three different standards for competency . results of this study indicated that examiners were almost equally divided in their opinions regarding the defendant competence when applying dusky rational understanding standard : forty seven percent found the defendant competent and fifty two percent found the defendant incompetent . similar results were found for the rational manner standard and the standard that did not use the word rational . these authors felt that the nearly equally divided response to the same vignette was shocking and concluded that the defendant fate depends only on who performs the evaluation . high levels of reliability do not , of course , ensure that valid decisions are being made . two evaluators could agree that the presence of psychosis automatically leads to a finding of incompetency . as long as the evaluators are in agreement about their criteria for determining psychosis , the reliability of their final judgments about competency would be high . as we suggest throughout this chapter , it is quite possible that too many evaluators inappropriately rely on traditional mental status issues without considering the functional aspects of a particular defendant case . the validity of competency judgments is difficult to assess because of the criterion problem . criterion related validity typically is assessed by examining concurrent validity and predictive validity . predictive validity is impossible to assess fully in the competency arena , because only defendants who are considered competent are allowed to proceed . it is feasible to look at the predictive validity of decisions about competent defendants , but it is not possible to assess the decisions about incompetent defendants , because they are remanded for treatment and their judicial proceedings are suspended . concurrent validity is also difficult to investigate , because it is not useful to examine correlations with other measures if one adopts a functional , case by case assessment of a defendant competency . for these reasons , there is no correct decision against which to compare judgments . as we have indicated , the courts usually accept mental health professionals judgments about competency . does this mean that the judgments are valid ? not necessarily , because courts often accept the evaluator definition of competency and his or her conclusions without review , leading to very high levels of examiner judge agreement an issue that has been acknowledged for quite some time . roesch and golding argued that the only ultimate way of assessing the validity of decisions about incompetency is to allow defendants who are believed to be incompetent to proceed with a trial anyway . this could be a provisional trial in which assessment of a defendant competence related abilities could continue . if a defendant were unable to participate , then the trial could be stopped . if a verdict had already been reached and the defendant was convicted , the verdict could be set aside . we suspect that , in a significant percentage of trials , alleged incompetent defendants would be able to participate . in addition to the obvious advantages to defendants , the use of a provisional trial could provide valuable information about what should be expected of a defendant in certain judicial proceedings . short of a provisional trial , it may be possible to address the validity issue by having independent experts evaluate the information provided by evaluators and other collateral information sources . functional evaluation approach . we believe the most reasonable approach to the assessment of competency is based on a functional evaluation of a defendant ability matched to the contextualized demands of the case . although an assessment of the mental status of a defendant is important , it is not sufficient as a method of evaluating competency . rather , the mental status information must be related to the specific demands of the legal case , as has been suggested by legal decisions , such as the ones involving amnesia . as in the case of psychosis , a defendant with amnesia is not per se incompetent to stand trial , as has been held in a number of cases . in missouri davis , the defendant had memory problems due to brain damage . nevertheless , the missouri supreme court held that amnesia alone was not a sufficient reason to bar the trial of an otherwise competent defendant . in montana austad , the court held that the bulk of the evidence against the defendant was physical and not affected by amnesia . finally , in a maryland decision , the court held that , because of the potential for fraud , amnesia does not justify a finding of incompetence . the court also stated that everyone has amnesia to some degree , because the passage of time erodes memory . these decisions are of interest because they support the view that evaluators can not reach a finding of incompetency independent of the facts of the legal case . similarly , a defendant may be psychotic and still be found competent to stand trial if the symptoms do not impair the defendant functional ability to consult with his or her attorney and otherwise rationally participate in the legal process . some cases are more complex than others and may , as a result , require different types of psycholegal abilities . thus , it may be that the same defendant is competent for one type of legal proceeding but not for another . in certain cases , a defendant may be required to testify . in this instance , a defendant who is likely to withdraw in a catatoniclike state may be incompetent to proceed ; however , the same defendant may be able to proceed if the attorney intends to enter a plea bargain . the functional approach is illustrated in the famous amnesia case of wilson united states . in that decision , the court of appeals held that six factors should be considered in determining whether a defendant amnesia impaired the ability to stand trial : the extent to which the amnesia affected the defendant ability to consult with and assist his lawyer . the extent to which the amnesia affected the defendant ability to testify in his own behalf . the extent to which the evidence in suit could be extrinsically reconstructed in view of the defendant amnesia . such evidence would include evidence relating to the crime itself as well as any reasonable possible alibi . the extent to which the government assisted the defendant and his counsel in that reconstruction . the strength of the prosecution case . most important here will be whether the government case is such as to negate all reasonable hypotheses of innocence . if there is any substantial possibility that the accused could , but for his amnesia , establish an alibi or other defense , it should be presumed that he would have been able to do so . any other facts and circumstances which would indicate whether or not the defendant had a fair trial . one could substitute any symptom for amnesia in the quote from wilson . if this were done , the evaluation of competency certainly would be one based on a determination of the manner in which a defendant incapacity may affect the legal proceedings . in fact , some state codes , such as florida , see winick , nineteen eighty three ) and utah code , already specify that the evaluators must relate a defendant mental condition to clearly defined legal factors , such as the defendant appreciation of the charges , the range and nature of possible penalties , and capacity to disclose to an attorney the pertinent facts surrounding the alleged offense . utah statute goes the farthest in this regard , specifying the most comprehensive range of psycholegal abilities to be addressed by evaluators and also requiring judges to specify which psycholegal abilities are impaired when a defendant is found incompetent . the assessment of competency requires consideration of both mental status and psycholegal abilities . unfortunately , research findings have demonstrated that evaluators often do not address an appropriate range of psycholegal abilities and most often do not draw a connection between the defendant emotional or behavioral impairments and impaired psycholegal capacities . we now turn to a review of the history of competency assessment methods . competency assessment tools . prior to the nineteen sixties , there were no standard methods for assessing competency . one of the first was a checklist developed by robey that focused on court process related issues , such as understanding of the legal process . another early procedure , developed by bukatman , foy , and de grazia , used a checklist and a set of interview questions . neither of these early measures was used often . undoubtedly , a . louis mcgarry and his colleagues at the harvard medical school laboratory of community psychiatry had the greatest early influence on the formal assessment of competency . mcgarry , a psychiatrist , was involved in the development of two measures : the competency screening test and the competency assessment instrument . we next discuss these measures in addition to a number of other measures that have since been developed . competency screening test . the competency screening test was created by lipsitt as a screening measure to identify clearly competent defendants and minimize the need for lengthy institutional evaluations . such a screening process was considered important because the vast majority of defendants referred for evaluations are competent . the high rate of competency is that many other factors influence referrals , including the use of the evaluation commitment as a method for denying bail , as a tactical maneuver to delay a trial , as a way of providing a basis for a reduction in charges or sentences , and as a means of getting defendants who are seen as in need of mental health treatment out of jails and into hospitals . mumley , tillbrook , and grisso referred to this as the subversion hypothesis ; that is , using competency evaluations in a backdoor manner to provide defendants with treatment . the cst , however , has seldom been used as a screening device because of various validity related concerns . specifically , the tool focuses on defendants knowledge of legal issues to the exclusion of other factors , and its scoring method has been criticized because of its idealized perception of the criminal justice system ; certain responses actually may reflect a sense of powerlessness in controlling one outcome in the legal system and may be based on past experiences with that system . the cst has been examined in a number of studies . although it has high levels of interrater reliability in terms of scoring the incomplete sentence format , studies comparing classifications based on cst cutoff scores and hospital evaluation decisions reveal that it has a high falsepositive rate . the results of these studies lead to a mixed review of the cst . although it appears that the cst is reliably scored , serious questions can be raised about its usefulness as a screening device , because of the potential for misclassifying potentially competent defendants . at this point , it is not recommended for use as the sole method of screening defendants . competency assessment instrument . the most important measure developed by mcgarry , the competency assessment instrument , comprises thirteen items related to legal issues . it has served as the basis for other subsequently developed forensic assessment instruments . the items include appraisal of available legal defenses , quality of relating to attorney , and capacity to disclose pertinent facts . each item is scored on a fivepoint scale , ranging from total incapacity to no incapacity . the cai manual includes clinical examples of levels of incapacity as well as suggested interview questions . the cai has been used in a number of jurisdictions , although perhaps more as an interview structuring device rather than the twostage screening manner as originally intended by mcgarry . unfortunately , few studies report either reliability or validity data . roesch and golding examined the utility of the cai by comparing thirty interviews conducted by pairs of interviewers who both used the tool ; item percentage agreements ranged from sixty eight percent to ninety six percent , with a median of eighty one percent . the interviewers were in agreement on the competency status of twenty nine of the thirty defendants . the interviewers decisions were in concordance with the more lengthy hospital evaluation decisions in twenty seven of thirty cases , or ninety percent . in subsequent studies , the cai has shown high levels of trained inter examiner agreement and examineroutcome agreement . as such , the cai may be useful as a screening device or as a fullblown interview measure . its primary disadvantage , relative to the instruments reviewed next , is in the range of psycholegal abilities articulated and its lack of focus on the nexus between psychopathology and psycholegal impairment . interdisciplinary fitness interview . the interdisciplinary fitness interview is designed to assess both the legal and psychopathological aspects of competency . the original ifi comprised three major sections : legal issues , psychopathological issues , and overall evaluation . the three items in the consensual judgment section reflect postassessment resolution of differences between judges . the ifi has been revised to reflect changes in constitutional law and the adoption by many states of articulated competency standards . in its current form , the interdisciplinary fitness interview revised taps into thirty one relatively specific psycholegal abilities organized across eleven global domains . the ifir was developed on the original model used by golding but was altered to reflect a decade of experience , numerous court opinions , and the accumulated professional literature on competency assessments . for example , it specifically addresses the issue of the iatrogenic effects of psychotropic medications , a defendant decisional competency to engage in rational choice about trial strategies , proceeding pro se , or pleading guilty and competency to confess . it was developed to mirror utah articulated competency code , which mandates that examiners address its eleven global domains . a revised and comprehensive training manual is available . golding used the ifi in a study of pretrial defendants in the boston area who were referred by court clinics to a state mental hospital for competency evaluation . teams composed of a lawyer and either a psychologist or a social worker interviewed defendants . although the interviews were conducted jointly , each evaluator independently completed the ifi rating form . the results demonstrated that lawyers and mental health evaluators could make reliable competency judgments together . they were in agreement on ninety seven percent of their final determinations of competency . by type of decision , the interviewers found fifty eight defendants to be competent and seventeen incompetent , and they disagreed on only two cases . fitness interview test . the fitness interview test was created in nineteen eighty four to structure fitness to stand trial assessments conducted in canada . it has since been extensively revised , and the current version is referred to as the fitness interview test . the fitr focuses on the psycholegal abilities of the individual . the scoring system has been changed to a threepoint scale , with a score of two meaning definite or serious impairment , one meaning possible or mild impairment , and zero meaning no impairment . the items on the fitr were developed to parallel the standards for fitness that were established in section two of the nineteen ninety two revision of the criminal code of canada , which are quite similar to the standards articulated by the united states supreme court in dusky united states . the fitr takes approximately thirty minutes to administer and consists of a structured interview that addresses three main areas : ability to understand the nature or object of the proceedings , or factual knowledge of criminal procedure ; ability to understand the possible consequences of the proceedings , or the appreciation of personal involvement in and importance of the proceedings ; and ability to communicate with counsel or to participate in the defense . each of these three sections is broken down into specific questions that tap into different areas involved in fitness to stand trial . the first section assesses the defendant understanding of the arrest process ; the nature and severity of current charges ; and the role of key players , legal processes , pleas , and court procedure . the second section assesses the defendant appreciation of the range and nature of possible penalties , appraisal of available legal defenses , and appraisal of likely outcomes . the final section assesses the defendant capacity to communicate facts to the lawyer , relate to the lawyer , plan legal strategy , engage in his or her own defense , challenge prosecution witnesses , testify relevantly , and manage courtroom behavior . the fitr has demonstrated excellent utility as a screening instrument in research studies . zapf and roesch compared the results of the fitr and an institutionbased fitness assessment for fifty seven defendants remanded to an inpatient psychiatric institution for an evaluation of fitness . when specific decision rules were used to classify defendants as either fit or unfit , the fitr correctly predicted fitness status for forty nine of the fifty seven individuals . the remaining eight individuals were judged to be unfit by the fitr and fit as a result of the inpatient assessment . these falsepositive errors were expected , as screening instruments should overestimate the rate of unfitness without making any falsenegative errors . there was one hundred percent agreement between the fitr and the institutionbased assessment for those individuals deemed fit to stand trial . research also has indicated that the fitr has adequate psychometric properties . viljoen , roesch , and zapf found that the average interrater reliability of the fitr for overall determination of fitness was ninety eight8 . reliability for the sections was lower and ranged from fifty four4 to seventy0 for groups of raters . to investigate the predictive validity of the fitr , zapf compared decisions made by the fitr to decisions made in an institutionbased evaluation of fitness in several samples . in the first sample , the overall rate of agreement between the fitr and institutionbased judgments was eighty seven percent , and the falsenegative error rate was two percent . the second sample yielded comparable results . boddy , roesch , zapf , and eaves compared defendants who were referred for fitness evaluations , including those who were eventually found unfit , and defendants who were not referred . performance on the fitr effectively distinguished these groups , such that referred defendants demonstrated significantly more impairment . as additional evidence of the construct validity of the fitr , zapf and roesch found reasonably high agreement between judgments made using the fitr and defendant performance on the macarthur competency assessment tool criminal adjudication . the fitr has also been used in research with young offenders . georgia court competency test . the georgia court competency test was originally developed by wildman and has since gone through a number of revisions . the original version consisted of seventeen items , and the revised version , referred to as the mississippi state hospital revision , consists of twenty one items . the first seven items of the gcctmsh require the defendant to visually identify the location of certain participants in the courtroom using a courtroom drawing as a reference . this is followed by questions related to the function of certain individuals in the courtroom , the charges that the defendant is facing , and his or her relationship with the lawyer . research on the gcctmsh has indicated that this instrument displays strong reliability and validity evidence . three factors identified by nicholson courtroom layout , general legal knowledge , and specific legal knowledge were later replicated by bagby . it was later suggested that this threefactor solution may be appropriate only for defendants who have been ordered to undergo assessment at the pretrial stage . these researchers indicated that a twofactor solution may be more appropriate for defendants who have been adjudicated incompetent and who are undergoing inpatient treatment to restore competence . the major drawback of the gcctmsh is that it focuses on foundational competencies and generally ignores the more important decisional competencies stressed in the ifi and fit approaches . macarthur competence assessment tool criminal adjudication . the macarthur competence assessment tool criminal adjudication was developed to assess three main subconstructs of the psycholegal abilities : understanding , reasoning , and appreciation . it comprises twenty two items that are grouped into three sections . the examiner begins by reading a hypothetical vignette to the defendant to ground the first two sections . the first section assesses the defendant ability to understand information about the legal system and the process . for each item , the defendant is asked a question related to the vignette and is awarded two points if he or she is able to answer the question in a manner that demonstrates full understanding . if the defendant earns fewer than two points , the examiner discloses the answer and asks the defendant to repeat the disclosure in his or her own words . the purpose of the disclosure is to independently assess the defendant capacity to understand and his or her actual or preexisting understanding . the second section assesses the defendant ability to reason . the first five items in this section assess the defendant ability to consider two pieces of factual information and identify the most important or legally relevant piece of information that should be disclosed to a lawyer . the last three items require the defendant to think through mock legal options and to evaluate them in various ways . the final section assesses the defendant ability to appreciate his or her own legal circumstances and situation . this section departs from the hypothetical vignette format to explore the defendant beliefs and perceptions about his or her personal role as a defendant and how he or she will be treated during the course of adjudication . these items are scored on the basis of the reasons that the defendant provides for his or her judgment and whether they are plausible or implausible . it is important to note that the authors of the maccatca emphasize that this instrument was developed for use as a tool rather than a test of competence and that it constitutes only one component of an overall assessment of competence . thus , the scores obtained must be interpreted within the context of the specific defendant case and integrated with all the other clinically relevant factors that may surround the specific circumstances of the case . the psychometric properties of the maccatca were examined based on a sample of seven hundred and twenty nine felony defendants in eight different states . the results indicated that the maccatca demonstrated high levels of reliability . for each of the three sections , internal consistency ranged from eighty one1 to eighty eight8 , and interrater reliability ranged from very good to excellent . otto and colleagues reported that additional support for the construct validity of the maccatca was found in the pattern of correlations between the maccatca measures and select clinical variables . maccatca understanding , reasoning , and appreciation scores correlated with estimated wechsler adult intelligence scale revised full scale iq scores , and with brief psychiatric rating scale total scores . the three maccatca scales correlated moderately with clinicians global ratings of competency . evaluation of competency to stand trial revised . the evaluation of competency to stand trial revised was developed to structure an examiner judgments about a defendant competence related abilities and to provide normative data in this regard . the ecstr represents the first formal competency assessment instrument created specifically to serve , in part , as a screener of feigned incompetency and consists of four scales . three of these scales were designed to tap into the three dusky prongs : consult with counsel , factual understanding of the courtroom proceedings , and rational understanding of the courtroom proceedings . the fourth scale , atypical presentation , is a response style measure consisting of five subscales : realistic , psychotic , nonpsychotic , impairment , and both . the cc scale is composed of ten questions with five criteria rated on a fivepoint scale , wherein zero equal not observed ; one equal questionable clinical significance ; two equal mild impairment ; three equal moderate impairment , unrelated competency ; and four equal severe impairment , directly related to competency . some of these items have more than one component to rate , and the highest score given is used toward the total scale score . the fu scale consists of fifteen questions with thirteen criteria . with one exception , items are rated on a fivepoint scale , wherein zero equal correct , one equal correct when prompted , two equal correct with attempts to educate , three equal wrong despite attempts to educate , and four equal grossly psychotic and totally unrelated to the question . the exception is item twelvea , which is coded either zero equal understands risk of talking to prosecutor or one equal does not understand risk . in recent years , attention has been paid to two specific populations for whom issues of competency are especially important for various reasons juveniles and individuals diagnosed with intellectual disabilities or mental retardation . this section examines some of the issues relevant to the assessment of competence for these special populations , including descriptions of instruments that have been developed to assess competence related abilities within these populations . relatively few researchers and scholars have addressed the problems faced by individuals diagnosed with intellectual disabilities within the criminal justice system . bonnie noted that one of the biggest problems for these individuals is under identification . that is , a considerable number of defendants diagnosed with mr are not referred for psychological evaluations , and a general failure to recognize the magnitude and existence of the disabilities of such individuals is a major cause of the low rate of referrals , magnitude or existence of the disabilities of such individuals is a major cause of the low rate of referrals . although the under identification hypothesis is widely accepted among researchers and scholars , there are few empirical data to support it . failure to identify individuals with intellectual disabilities and subsequently refer them for evaluations of competency is often a result of the tendency of these individuals to attempt to hide their limitations . that is , persons diagnosed with mr are often compliant and cooperative with authority figures , such as judges or lawyers , and are likely to pretend to understand their lawyers when , in fact , they may not . research by everington , notariosmull , and horton suggests that defendants diagnosed with mr may be able to hide their deficits in certain circumstances . nevertheless , in many cases , a cloak of competence gives these individuals the appearance of normalcy in the competency context . legally significant impairments then become visible only when the individual also has a severe mental illness or acts in a strange or disruptive manner . it is common for these individuals to proceed to trial without ever having been identified and , consequently , to proceed through the criminal justice system without understanding the process or punishment , often unknowingly participating in agreements that can result in grave and longlasting consequences . the misidentification of individuals diagnosed with intellectual disabilities can result in a loss of liberty and the violation of the right to a fair trial . once individuals diagnosed with mr have been identified , it is important that an examiner who is familiar with the specific issues relevant to the diagnosis conduct the evaluation . petrella noted that the probability of an adequate evaluation of issues involving such a diagnosis is highly unlikely for several reasons , including the fact that many evaluators are not qualified to administer intelligence tests , evaluators may have minimal experience with mr and limited exposure to the unique clinical presentation of individuals with such a diagnosis , referrals to professionals and experts in the area of intellectual disability per se seldom occur , and professionals with specific expertise with such persons usually have minimal or no experience with forensic issues . research examining the rates of incompetence among defendants with mr has provided conflicting findings . in missouri , seventeen percent of defendants referred for competence evaluations and diagnosed with mr were adjudicated incompetent whereas in connecticut and michigan , rates of incompetence were reported to be twelve percent and thirty three percent , respectively . in addition , the probability of being found incompetent also varies by severity of the defendant intellectual limitations . in a virginia study , twenty three percent of defendants diagnosed with mild mr were deemed incompetent , whereas sixty eight percent of those with moderate mr were found incompetent . in terms of restoration to competency for individuals diagnosed with mr , bonnie hypothesized that the possibility of restoration is highly unlikely . in a sample of thirty eight incompetent defendants with such a diagnosis in virginia , only sixteen percent were considered likely to be restored , and it was estimated that restoration was unlikely for approximately sixty six percent of the defendants . in a nineteen ninety four study of two hundred and seventy one defendants diagnosed with mr and committed to a special competence restoration program , individuals with higher iqs were more likely to be found competent or restored to competence . in addition , the author concluded that the absence of comorbidity was associated with restorability , as only three percent of those with comorbid disorders were restored to competence as compared to approximately twenty percent of those without comorbid disorders . although further research certainly is required in this area , research efforts that have examined issues of intellectual disability within the criminal justice system beginning in the early nineteen nineties can be viewed as a step in the right direction . the nineteen nineties also saw an increase in research examining issues of competency within the juvenile population . competency has become more important for adolescents , because the juvenile justice system has shifted to a more punishmentoriented model as opposed to a rehabilitative one , and increasing numbers of adolescents are being either waived or transferred to adult court . research on competency to stand trial in juveniles has examined issues related to the evaluation of developmental maturity , decisionmaking abilities , and other factors that might impact adjudicative competence . in addition , comparisons of juveniles competence related abilities with those of adults has been the focus of much research and scholarly writing , and numerous studies have found age and competency to be negatively correlated , such that younger children are more likely to be found incompetent . as the focus of this chapter is on competency to stand trial in adults , the reader is referred to additional sources for more indepth information related to juvenile competency . specialized measures of competency . in recent years , there has been a move toward the development of competence assessment instruments for specialized populations of defendants , such as defendants diagnosed with mr or juvenile defendants . next we briefly describe some of the recent advances in these areas . competence assessment for standing trial for defendants with mental retardation . everington developed an instrument designed to assess competence with defendants diagnosed with mr called the competence assessment for standing trial for defendants with mental retardation . the items of the castmr were derived from a review of relevant literature , case law , and existing competency to stand trial assessment instruments . the castmr consists of fifty questions , which are administered orally to the defendant . the questions are divided into three sections that address the basic elements of the dusky standard . section i , basic legal concepts , includes twenty five multiple choice items that address concepts related to the criminal trial process and terms that are critical to the trial process . section two , skills to assist defense , is comprised of fifteen multiple choice items that address the attorney client relationship . items on sections i and ii are scored as either correct or incorrect . section iii , understanding case events , consists of ten openended questions designed to assess the defendant ability to describe the relevant circumstances of his or her offense . items are scored as one point , one point , or zero points based on the ability of the individual to relay information regarding his or her case in an accurate and understandable manner . applying psychology to criminal proceedings . the castmr was developed to assist in the determination of the competency of a defendant diagnosed with mr . the authors of the castmr emphasized its use as only one component of an overall assessment . results of the castmr should be considered in the context of other relevant information , such as interviews , observations , and social history . the authors of this instrument conducted two validation studies to investigate the psychometric properties of the castmr . interrater reliability for section iii was estimated between eighty percent and eighty seven percent . juvenile measures of competency . the juvenile adjudicative competence interview is an interview guide for clinicians that provides standardized questions to assist in the evaluation of developmentally sensitive information relevant to competency to stand trial for juveniles . the jaci covers twelve primary areas of evaluation . the macarthur judgment evaluation was developed for use in the assessment of immaturity of judgment in juveniles . similar to the maccatca , the macjen utilizes a vignettebased procedure to address three types of legal decisions typically involved in the criminal process : responding to police interrogations after the commission of a crime , disclosing information to one defense attorney , and responding to a plea agreement and testifying against other defendants . respondents are to choose among various options and are asked to recommend a best and worst choice for the person in the vignette . research studies have been conducted using the macjen ; however , it is not available for use in clinical settings . we conclude our chapter with a discussion of several issues to which examiners must pay special attention when conducting an evaluation of competency . prior to interviewing a defendant , it is good clinical practice to speak with the defense attorneys to determine as accurately as possible why the fitness issue was raised , what evidence was offered , and which trial and dispositional alternatives are being considered by both parties . all indications of prior mental health contacts should be pursued before the interview takes place so that the examiner has as complete a set of mental health records as possible . similarly , police reports of the alleged offense are necessary and a criminal history record is helpful , particularly if the defendant has cycled through the criminal justice and mental health systems several times . if the defendant is an inpatient , institutional records and progress notes should be reviewed as well as all available psychological test data . finally , the examiner should maintain an accurate record of when , where , and how information about the defendant was made available as well as a date and time record of all contacts with the defendant , attorneys , other mental health professionals , and other collateral informants . these records are invaluable at later stages if legal tactics designed to confuse or mislead a witness are attempted . having prepared for an examination in this fashion , one can conduct an efficient and comprehensive interview in a relatively brief period of time . most delays in conducting an evaluation and , therefore , time spent on inpatient status can be largely avoided , and a more relevant examination conducted , if these steps are taken . prior to the interview , the defendant should be provided with proper informed consent or notification , including being informed about the parameters of confidentiality . the possibility of recording the interview should be considered . the examiner should be aware of any aspects of the interview and the resulting report that are covered by statute or accepted practice within the jurisdiction . as an example of the former , some states require notifications that inform the defendant of the limitations of confidentiality that may apply . similarly , other states dictate the form of the report to the court , and an examiner report may be excluded if it does not comply with the required format . in people harris , for example , a psychiatrist report was excluded , and the defendant subsequent conviction was reversed because the opinion was presented in conclusory terms and failed to provide the clinical facts and reasons upon which it was based , thus precluding the trier of fact from independently assessing the weight to be given such an opinion . the current competency statutes in illinois , florida , and utah are in many ways models of this developing trend , insofar as they require examiners to identify the factual bases for their conclusions and opinions , describe the defendant mental and physical disabilities and how these may impair his or her ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the defense , discuss the likelihood that the defendant will respond to a specified course of treatment , and explain procedures that would be employed to compensate for the defendant disabilities , if applicable . we applaud this sort of specification and urge examiners to adopt the practice , even if it is not mandated in their own jurisdiction . competency evaluations and the associated reports prepared for the court should be completed in accordance with both the spirit and the letter of the law . the examiner must be thoroughly acquainted with the legal literature and in some sense anticipate developments in one practice . for example , per estelle smith , it is clearly prohibited to introduce material obtained under courtordered competency proceedings at a critical stage of trial . many states mirror this in their statutes but do not regulate the common practice of requesting competency and insanity evaluations at the same time , often resulting in a combined report . we believe this practice is improper , and recommend that separate interviews , with distinct reports , be prepared when possible . the trier of fact is required to separate these issues ; however , it is virtually impossible to do so when the reports are combined . a defendant who is clearly psychotic and legally insane at the time of an assault may respond rapidly to treatment upon arrest and be nonpsychotic and legally fit when actually examined . caution and fairness dictate keeping the reports separate when possible so that the courts can consider the two issues independently . this chapter touches on only a small selection of the vast amount of research and writing on competence to stand trial . the purpose of this chapter was to provide the reader with a brief overview of competency law , research , and assessment . for a comprehensive review of empirical research on competence to stand trial , the reader is referred to grisso , cooper and grisso , and mumley . these authors reviewed the research on the evaluation of competence in three to five years intervals . as well , pirelli , gottdiener and zapf conducted a meta analysis using sixty eight studies and over twenty defendants that provides a quantitative review of the comparative research on competence . pirelli , zapf and gottdiener set forth a number of guidelines intended to serve as a reference for those conducting research in this area . finally , zapf and roesch presented a full consideration of best practices in the evaluation of competency to stand trial . these references as well as those listed in the introductory paragraph of this chapter will provide the reader with a more indepth understanding of competency to stand trial . 