the potential for psychologists to assist the legal system has been recognized since the early twentieth century , but only within the past fifty years has psychology begun to realize this potential in meaningful ways . this progress has included newly developed professional organizations , such as the american psychology law society and the international association for correctional and forensic psychology ; graduate , internship , and fellowship programs in the specialty area ; organizations devoted to certifying qualified practitioners , such as the american board of forensic psychology and the american board of police and public safety psychology ; such scientific journals as law and human behavior , behavioral sciences and the law , and criminal justice and behavior ; and books devoted to the interface of psychology and law . this specialty area has continued to grow rapidly since the previous edition of the handbook of forensic psychology was published in two thousand and six , with increasing numbers of psychologists becoming involved in forensic practice and research and a steady flow of new ideas and information becoming available . this fourth edition of the handbook of forensic psychology , like its predecessors , aims to provide an authoritative and comprehensive resource for understanding the theoretical foundations of forensic psychology , becoming familiar with the expanding research base in this specialty , and learning to apply forensic concepts artfully in everyday practice . to this end , the contributors to this volume , as in the prior three editions , are accomplished scholars and practitioners in their respective areas . some are prominent academicians who conduct research and offer consultation . others are actively engaged service providers who also make significant contributions to the literature . several have degrees in law as well as psychology . these authors were asked to delineate the enduring issues in an area of their specialty and frame these issues in the light of contemporary research and prevailing conceptual formations . although similar in focus and structure to previous editions , the present volume has been substantially rewritten and updated to enhance its value . the content and sequence of the chapters have been reframed to increase their relevance to the practice of forensic psychology and encompass both recent research findings and developments in statutory and case law . as testimony to the fresh perspectives in this fourth edition , the table of contents identifies forty eight authors and coauthors , of whom twenty four are new contributors to the handbook . the present volume comprises six parts . part one concerns the context of forensic psychology and begins with chapters on the history of forensic psychology and on defining the nature of forensic psychology . chapter three then provides information about and guidelines for accessing the legal literature . chapter four alerts forensic psychologists to ethical and legal considerations that should guide their work , with specific attention to the american psychological association ethics code and the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology . chapter five describes training models and resources in forensic psychology for faculty developing programs of instruction and for students and general practitioners seeking specialized education or supervised experience in forensic psychology . part two comprises five chapters concerning applications of psychology in civil proceedings . chapter six addresses family law procedures and issues related to conducting evaluations of children and their parents involved in disputed custody . chapter seven discusses personal injury litigation , with particular attention to considerations in psychological assessment . chapter eight reviews the impact of recent congressional legislation on identifying and treating educational disabilities . chapter nine examines issues related to the assessment of persons competence to execute a variety of legal rights in civil contexts . chapter ten concludes this section with guidelines for conducting evaluations in cases of alleged child abuse or neglect . part three deals with applying psychology in criminal proceedings and covers three critical considerations of concern to triers of fact . chapter eleven provides guidelines for assessing competence to stand trial . chapter twelve traces the development and current applications of the concepts of criminal responsibility and legal insanity . chapter thirteen delineates the related nuances of criminal intent and diminished capacity . part four presents information on seven special applications of forensic psychology . chapter fourteen leads off with a discussion of violence risk research and assessment , and chapter fifteen follows with an overview of emerging roles for psychologists in law enforcement . chapter sixteen reviews considerations related to evaluating jury decision making and promoting juror competence . chapters seventeen and eighteen review developments related to the evaluation of testimony given by adults and children . chapters nineteen and twenty then provide accounts of the development of lie detection and hypnosis and describe current and emerging trends in forensic uses of these procedures . part five of the handbook looks at effective communication of expert opinion in forensic cases . chapter twenty one focuses on the essentials of writing appropriate and useful reports , and chapter twenty two discusses the admissibility of expert testimony and key considerations in communicating one work and opinions to legal decision makers . part six concludes the handbook with consideration of some important aspects of providing services to offenders . chapter twenty three discusses principles of effective correctional rehabilitation in both prison settings and the community , and chapter twenty four provides a behind-the-bars guide to conducting psychotherapy with offenders . chapter twenty five continues this theme with specific attention to diagnostic and treatment procedures useful in working with sexual offenders . finally , the appendix provides readers with the full text of the specialty guidelines for forensic psychology . we would like to thank our authors for their valuable contributions to this volume , both those who revised chapters that appeared in previous editions and those who joined us for the first time in this edition . we also want to acknowledge with appreciation the guidance and support of the john wiley and sons editorial staff , particularly patricia rossi , executive editor and kara borbely , editorial program coordinator . finally , we recognize and honor the contributions of our colleague allen hess , who served as coeditor of the first three editions before his untimely death . readers familiar with previous editions of the handbook will recognize his fingerprints on this edition as well . in the course of writing this chapter over four editions of this handbook , we have learned a few lessons . in the first edition , we asserted that psychologists do not care about the history of their profession but are instead drawn to contemporary issues and theories . we learned that this was a simplistic generalization , so in subsequent editions we acknowledged that our initial statement had been rash . psychologists do care about history , as is apparent from numerous articles published in professional journals reviewing historical trends , the continuing publication of a journal devoted to the history of psychology , and special interest divisions of professional organizations , such as division twenty six , society for the history of psychology , of the american psychological association . we have also learned that there is some danger in proclaiming an event or a person a historic first or a father , because these proclamations may be challenged , usually with kindness but not always with good humor . psychology , like other disciplines , needs historical insights . it needs to understand whence it came in order to assess where it is going . a perusal of journals and books published at the turn of the twentieth century , for example , may spark interest in a concept long forgotten or a predecessor whose theories and research deserve to be revisited . yet delving into early works reminds us of false starts and the occasional damage they did , such as the work of henry h . goddard on feeblemindedness during the early nineteeth and the self promotion of hugo munsterberg . however , we have also learned that hindsight is imperfect ; people are sometimes overlooked , and the historical discoveries may be incomplete . we thus approach this chapter once again with humility . to paraphrase the phrase that journalism is the first rough draft of history , we say here that this chapter is our fourth rough draft of the history of forensic psychology , with emphasis on its american origins . in these early years of the twenty first century , forensic psychology remains a young branch of applied psychology , having been recognized by the apa as a specialty in two thousand and one and recertified in two thousand and eight . even before that , in nineteen ninety one , specialty guidelines for forensic psychologists were adopted by the american psychology law society , which is division forty one of the apa . these guidelines were recently revised , renamed specialty guidelines for forensic psychology , and accepted by the apa council of representatives . interestingly , although forensic psychology was initially viewed as primarily clinical in nature such as by providing assessments to the courts its scope has broadened to encompass the practice of psychology as it provides expertise to the law in a very wide range of contexts . this broad view of forensic psychology was not always supported . according to ronald roesch , for example , most psychologists define the area more narrowly to refer to clinical psychologists who are engaged in clinical practice within the legal system . a few years later , brigham and grisso modified this somewhat , noting many psychologists define forensic psychology more narrowly to refer to clinical psychologists who are engaged in clinical practice within the legal system . the distinction here is between psychologists who bring scientific information to the courts for their consideration in cases and psychologists who evaluate individuals and testify about them in reference to a legal question . in recognizing forensic psychology as a specialty in two thousand and one , the apa itself adopted the narrow approach , to include the primarily clinical aspects of forensic assessment , treatment , and consultation . however , as noted , the specialty guidelines take a broader view . in this chapter , forensic psychology is being viewed broadly . it is both the research endeavor that examines aspects of human behavior directly related to the legal process and the professional practice of psychology within or in consultation with a legal system that encompasses both criminal and civil law and the numerous areas where they intersect . therefore , the term forensic psychology refers broadly to the production of psychological knowledge and its application to the civil and criminal justice systems . it includes activities as varied as these : courtroom testimony , child custody evaluations , law enforcement candidate screening , treatment of offenders in correctional facilities , assessment of plaintiffs with disability claims , research and theory building in the area of criminal behavior , and the design and implementation of intervention and prevention programs for youthful offenders . a review of the table of contents of this handbook indicates a similarly broad focus . in the pages to follow , after an introductory section covering seminal contributions , we review developments in four major areas of forensic psychology : legal psychology , correctional psychology , police psychology , and criminal psychology . readers will undoubtedly recognize that there is considerable overlap in these categories and in the subheadings . correctional psychology , for example , presupposes some understanding of criminal psychology . assessment , which we cover under legal psychology , is an essential tool of the trade for psychologists , and it underlies all practice . nonetheless , for purposes of identifying historical trends and landmarks , discussion of these four distinctive areas is warranted . we focus on forensic psychology rather than forensic psychiatry , which has its own welldocumented and rich history , probably centered on the early work of isaac ray , who is considered by some the father of forensic psychiatry . we also do not delve into the origins of the sociology of law , referred to as sociological jurisprudence , or the legal realism movement within the law itself . this movement , born during the first third of the twentieth century , advocated a partnership between the law and the social sciences . in addition , we emphasize the work of forensic psychologists in the united states and , to a lesser extent , oneanada , although we give due recognition to the work of european psychologists , who dominated the field prior to world war I . the field prior to world war one . we review the achievements of psychologists from the end of the nineteenth century and extend our discussion into the nineteen seventies , when forensic psychology came of age . the reader interested in more detail about the issues and individuals discussed might check landmark summaries of psychology and law published by whipple , hutchins and slesinger , louisell , tapp , loh and monahan and loftus . more recently , brigham and grisso and mulberger have published historical pieces on this topic , the latter with a strong emphasis on german influences . on the whole , however , developments from the nineteen eighties forward are addressed in the works of other contributors to this handbook . legal psychology . legal psychology refers to psychological theory , research , and practice directly pertinent to the law and legal issues . it focuses on psycholegal research and contacts with judges , lawyers , and other lawrelated professionals in a wide range of contexts . the origins of legal psychology can be traced to the work of experimental psychologists in europe in the nineteenth century , particularly in relation to the psychology of testimony and most particularly to the testimony of children , whose memory of events was considered unreliable . we discuss this work shortly . do chestnut or oak trees lose their leaves earlier in autumn ? do horses in the field stand with head or tail to the wind ? in which direction do the seeds of an apple point ? what was the weather one week ago today ? when mckeen cattell posed these questions to fifty six college students at columbia university in march eighteen ninety three , he was probably conducting one of the first american studies , albeit an informal one , on the psychology of testimony . the questions he asked his students were similar to those that might naturally be asked in a court of justice . his subjects were allowed thirty seconds to consider their answers , then told to write their responses and indicate their degree of confidence in each answer . when cattell conducted his informal and preliminary study , it was reasonably well established that eyewitness accounts of events were unreliable and incomplete . as we will see shortly , both french and german psychologists were familiar with the powerful influence of suggestion over sensation and perception , having conducted substantial research in these areas . the specific conditions under which testimony was inaccurate were not known , however . cattell noted : an unscrupulous attorney can discredit the statements of a truthful witness by cunningly selected questions . the jury , or at least the judge , should know how far errors in recollection are normal and how they vary under different conditions . but cattell himself was surprised at both the degree of inaccuracy he uncovered and the wide range of individual differences in the levels of confidence expressed by the students . answers to the weather question , for example , were equally distributed over all kinds of weather which are possible at the beginning of march . some students were nearly always sure they were correct , even when they were not , while others were consistently uncertain and hesitant in their answers , even when they were correct . cattell study probably was the genesis of modern forensic psychology in the united states , because it sparked the interest of other researchers in the psychology of testimony , which remains to this day a dominant research interest among legal psychologists . joseph jastrow immediately replicated cattell experiment at the university of wisconsin and obtained similar results . aside from this brief flirtation , however , american psychologists did not immediately embrace the study of legal issues . psychologists in europe seemed more intrigued they had long been interested in the psychological concepts involved . first , alfred binet replicated cattell project in france . in addition , he summarized relevant experiments on the psychology of testimony that were being conducted in europe , and he eventually called for a science psychojudiciaire . most significant for the historical development of forensic psychology was the apparent fascination cattell experiment and binet work held for william stern , who had received his doctorate in psychology at the university of berlin under the tutelage of hermann ebbinghaus . in nineteen one , stern collaborated with the criminologist liszt in an attempt to lend realism to the cattell design . stern and liszt conducted a reality experiment in a law class , staging a bogus quarrel between two students over a scientific controversy . as stern later recounted it , the argument accelerated until one student drew a revolver . at this point , the professor intervened and asked for written and oral reports from the class about aspects of the dispute . although the witnesses were law students who , stern asserted , should have known the pitfalls of testifying , none could give a faultless report . the number of errors per individual ranged from four to twelve . moreover , the researchers found that inaccuracies increased with respect to the second half of the scenario , when excitement and tension were at their peak . they concluded tentatively that affective reactions inhibit exact observation and reliable remembrance . by his own account , stern was more interested in basic research than its application . indeed , when i began in nineteen one to examine the correctness of recollection among my students , i was determined by theoretical interests in the realm of memory rather than by any practical considerations . yet once confronted with the results , i realized the importance of this research beyond the borders of mere academic psychology . throughout that first decade of the twentieth century , stern was an active researcher in the psychology of testimony . he also helped establish and edited the first journal on the psychology of testimony , betrage zur psychologie der aussage , which was published in leipzig . the journal was superseded in nineteen seven by the much broader zeitschrift fur angewande psychologie , edited by stern and his colleague otto lipmann . in a cautionary note about his research , stern stressed that most witnesses did not intentionally falsify their reports . rather , the subtle and common problem created was one of unintentional falsification : subjective sincerity does not guarantee objective truthfulness , he wrote . in his research , stern concluded among other things that : leading and suggestive questions contaminate the accuracy of eyewitness accounts of critical events ; there are important differences between adult and child witnesses ; lineups are of limited value when the members are not matched for age and physical appearance ; and interceding events between an initial event and its recall can have drastic effects on memory . therefore , modern forensic psychology began as legal psychology with empirical research on the psychology of testimony . courtroom testimony . pinpointing the origins of courtroom testimony by psychologists in europe is not easy . sources differ , often depending on the nature of the forum or its context . hale suggests that the earliest testimony by a psychologist in a criminal court occurred in eighteen ninety six , when albert von schrencknotzing testified at the trial of a munich man accused of murdering three women . the murders had received extensive and sensational press coverage in the months prior to the trial , and schrencknotzing opined that this pretrial publicity , through a process of suggestion , probably led numerous witnesses to retroactive memoryfalsification . witnesses could not distinguish between what they had seen and what the press reported had happened . schrencknotzing supported this opinion with social framework testimony in the form of accounts of laboratory research on memory and suggestibility . although the accused was convicted on the basis of solid evidence , schrencknotzing direct application of the psychology of suggestion to court processes helped stimulate the interest of both german jurists and psychologists . however , karl marbe , a psychology professor at the university of wurzburg , credited himself with the first court appearance , fifteen years later . the first german psychological legal expert opinion was my testimony in a case of sexual assault in wurzburg in nineteen eleven , in which i had to discuss the question of the testimony of children . in that case , several german adolescent girls had accused their teacher of sexually molesting them . marbe persuaded the jury that the girls statements were unreliable , and the teacher was exonerated . also in nineteen eleven , several psychologists testified in a belgian murder trial in which a man was accused of raping and killing a nineyearold girl . two of the child playmates had apparently seen the murderer but gave inconsistent and contradictory accounts . among the psychologists retained by the defense was julian varendonck , who designed a series of experiments based on questions suggested by information obtained at the preliminary hearing . varendonck subjects were children of approximately the same age as the two witnesses . he found that they were inaccurate in their recall of important events . over the objection of the prosecution , he was allowed to present the results of these experiments as well as the general research on the psychology of testimony that was available at that time . whipple wrote that varendonck testimony elicited violent outbursts from the court authorities , but it reached the jury and induced a verdict of not guilty , whipple added that the psychology of testimony had found its way formally into the court room and saved a man life . the jury found the defendant not guilty . varendonck , it should be noted , was vehemently opposed to any use of child witnesses in the courtroom . in contrast , both binet and stern believed that errors in recollection , whether by children or adults , were more a reflection of leading , suggestive courtroom questioning than of any natural tendency to distort reality . in nineteen twelve , marbe became one of the earliest european psychologists to testify at a civil trial , offering expert opinion on the psychological issue of reaction times as applied to a train wreck near mullheim . marbe was asked to testify as to the probable effect of alcohol both on the mental status of the engineer and the reaction time of the fireman and guard applying the brakes . based on reaction time experiments , marbe testified that the train could not have been stopped in time to avert a disaster . as he did in the criminal case , marbe appears to take credit for paving the way for other psychologists : since that time , through my agency and that of others , a mass of psychological expert testimony has been submitted , bearing continually upon new circumstances . although mulberger wrote that other psychologists were testifying in civil courts even before marbe time , it is difficult to find written documentation of who they might have been . marbe , along with stern , has been credited with developing forensic psychology in germany . in essence , it is not difficult to find illustrations of psychologists who had impact on the nascent field of legal psychology , but ranking their contributions chronologically must be done with caution . european psychologists at the turn of the twentieth century and until world war i also were delving into the area of guilt deception , european psychologists at the turn of the twentieth century and until world war one also were delving into the area of guilt deception , the precursor of the lie detection of today . in nineteen four , psychologists in germany , austria , and switzerland were busy developing a lie detection test for use in criminal investigations . the test was a word association time task in which key words were embedded in a list of innocuous words , the test was a word reaction time task in which key words were embedded in a list of innocuous words . presumably , the slower the reaction time in recognizing the key words , the more likely the respondent was trying to deceive . barland , who has reviewed this history in impressive detail , notes that this approach did not catch on because it was inefficient , time consuming , and often yielded inconclusive results . at the turn of the twentieth century , american psychologists remained comparatively uninterested in applying research on topics related to law . one reason was that they were just beginning to explore the broad psychological landscape and had little inclination to specialize in lawrelated matters . this reticence was probably also due to the influence of wilhelm wundt , who had trained many of the american pioneers in his leipzig laboratory . wundt , a philosopher and an experimentalist , was wary of applying psychology until sufficient research had been conducted . he believed that the premature use of partial information could be disastrous . his students often took this caveat quite seriously , although some , like cattell , eventually began to link the laboratory to the world outside . one of wundt not so cautious students was the german psychologist hugo munsterberg , who arrived in the united states in eighteen ninety two at the invitation of william james to direct the psychology laboratory at harvard university . munsterberg spent twenty four years trying to persuade the public that psychology had something to offer virtually every area of human endeavor . now acknowledged by many as the father of applied psychology , he believed psychological knowledge could be applied to education , industry , advertising , music , art , and , of course , law . his claims were often exaggerated , however , and his proposals were rarely empirically based . he usually published in popular magazines rather than in scholarly journals . he also incessantly promoted himself and his native germany , a practice that alienated him increasingly from his colleagues and the public as world war i approached . in fact , his ardent progerman stance may have had as much to do with the public antipathy toward him as his abrasive personality . not surprisingly , the legal community vehemently resisted his intrusion into its territory , and there was much ado about this . charles c . moore , a wellknown attorney , referred to munsterberg work as yellow psychology and concluded that it provided nothing new or helpful to the court . most noteworthy , the great legal commentator john henry wigmore found it necessary to assail munsterberg in a satirical and devastating law review article . wigmore attack was prompted by the publication of munsterberg controversial bestseller on the witness stand , in which he proclaimed that the time was ripe to apply psychology to the practical needs of the legal system . the book which was essentially a compilation of already published columns dealt with a wide spectrum of topics , ranging from witness accuracy and jury persuasion to hypnosis and lie detection . in nineteen fourteen , munsterberg published a study on group decision making , using harvard and radcliffe students as subjects , which he titled the mind of the juryman . in a conclusion not atypical of the times , he stated that the psychologist has every reason to be satisfied with the jury system as long as the women are kept out of it . he based his conclusion on a finding that the female students in his study were less accurate in their final decisions than the male students . interestingly , as will be noted shortly , one of his own students later arrived at a very different conclusion . munsterberg , always willing to give speeches , gave his inaugural lecture at radcliffe college in eighteen ninety four and his last at the same location in nineteen sixteen , when he suddenly died of a heart attack midsentence while lecturing his general psychology class . landy wrote that at the time of his death . munsterberg was an object of public scorn and was well on the way to professional ostracism . by nineteen nineteen , less than three years after his death , there was hardly any reference to any of his more than ten books and dozens of articles in basic and applied psychology . benjamin noted that munsterberg was one of the most despised individuals in america . interestingly , in a recent article , sporer correctly pointed out that much valuable information about early contributions of other individuals in legal psychology has been lost because of excessive focus on munsterberg . in similar fashion , bornstein and penrod sought to resurrect the longignored work of george frederick arnold , a civil servant in the british empire who published psychology applied to legal evidence and other constructions of law in nineteen six , two years before munsterberg on the witness stand . bornstein and penrod admirably compared the value of these respective texts , noting that arnold , even though he was not an academician , displayed an impressive familiarity with the psychological literature of the day . they noted also that his style was dry and reads like the serious academic tome that it is , whereas munsterberg style was directed at a general , less serious audience . bornstein and penrod are to be commended for bringing attention to this obscure work , but the fact remains that arnold overall contributions were not as far reaching as those of munsterberg . munsterberg has been accused of being more an opportunist than a trailblazer , however . it is tempting to blame his brashness , his apparently despicable demeanor , and his progerman views for the tenuous and occasionally hostile initial relationship between psychology and law . nonetheless , he undeniably pushed his reluctant american colleagues into the practical legal arena and made a seminal contribution to applied psychology in general and forensic psychology in particular . world war i placed in abeyance most of the exploration in applying psychology to law , although the war and early postwar years saw a few landmarks in american forensic psychology , including the gradual acceptance of psychologists as expert witnesses . the first psychologists , along with other social scientists , were also appointed to law school faculties during these years . psychologist donald slesinger , a protege of robert m . hutchins , made his mark during the years immediately following world war i . although he had no formal legal training , slesinger was appointed by acting dean hutchins as a oneyear sterling fellow to the yale law school in nineteen twenty seven . the following year , he became a research assistant . in nineteen twenty nine , he was appointed associate professor , teaching a course in the psychology of evidence , which appears to qualify him as the first psychologist granted faculty status in an american law school . in nineteen thirty , slesinger followed hutchins to the university of chicago , where he served as professor of law and , briefly , as dean of the law school . several years earlier , psychologist william marston had been the first to receive a faculty appointment as professor of legal psychology when he joined the faculty at american university in nineteen twenty two . marston was by far the most influential psychologist associated with the legal system during this era . he was a student of munsterberg but did not have his mentor penchant for alienating the legal community and much of the american public . he received a law degree in nineteen eighteen and a phd in psychology in nineteen twenty one , both from harvard . marston interests were multifaceted . although admitted to the massachusetts bar , marston soon gave up his law practice to concentrate on psychology . as a laboratory assistant in psychology at radcliffe college , marston had discovered a significant positive correlation between systolic blood pressure and lying , which became the basis of the modern polygraph . in fact , marston was the psychologist who testified in the landmark case frye , the case that set the original standard for the acceptance of expert testimony in federal courts . although his continuing work in lie detection represents one of his major contributions to the forensic area , it was by no means the only one . he frequently consulted with attorneys , police , and other criminal justice personnel , and his evidence was determinative in the acquittals of several defendants accused of murder . it is likely , therefore , that marston along with lewis terman and psychologists associated with the new york city psychopathic clinic qualifies as one of the first psychological consultants to the criminal justice system in the united states . marston also conducted the first serious research on the jury system . using subjects in simulated jury conditions , he found in a series of studies that written evidence was superior to oral evidence ; free narration , though less complete , was more accurate than crossexamination or direct questioning ; a witness caution in answering was a good indicator of accuracy ; and female jurors considered evidence more carefully than male jurors . because of his legal background and his cautious style , marston ideas and research were more acceptable to the legal community than munsterberg had been , although there is little evidence that the legal system put his findings to extensive use . this is not surprising because some of his recommendations were inapposite to the adversarial process in the united states , and others would have required fundamental changes in court procedures . interestingly , the german psychologist stern , discussed earlier , had cautioned his colleagues that experimental research in psychology might be of more relevance to the inquisitorial process used in european courts , where a neutral jurist asked questions of witnesses , than to the adversarial process in the united states . also during this time period , various reviewers took on the task of documenting the progress of legal psychology . hutchins and slesinger , for example , coauthored numerous summary articles on its status . slesinger wrote another article with marion pilpel in nineteen twenty nine , surveying forty eight articles written by psychologists on issues relating to the law that had appeared in professional journals up to that time . eleven were concerned with the psychology of testimony , ten with deception , seven with intelligence and crime , and six with criminal behavior . the remainder focused on general topics such as the scientific method or legal research . fifteen of the forty eight articles had been written by german psychologists . like applied psychology in general , legal psychology was somewhat dormant between the two world wars and did not regain its energy until the late nineteen forties and nineteen fifties . in addition to marston work , the period did see scattered research on how juries formed opinions and verdicts , a master thesis on the relationship between narrative and interrogative methods of questioning , another study on questioning and testimony , and a survey of legal and psychological opinions about the validity of some of wigmore rules of evidence . according to loh , there was some interest in psychology and law during the late nineteen twenties and the nineteen thirties . however , this interest was almost exclusively on the part of lawyers , who produced such books as legal psychology , psychology for the lawyer , and law and the social sciences . wigmore , the foremost authority on rules of evidence , paved the way for the use of test data in the courtroom . he observed that the psychometrist introducing test evidence would stand on the same footing as the expert witness to insanity , as long as such tests are recognized as valid and feasible by the general scientific community . in nineteen thirty one , psychologist harold burtt wrote legal psychology , possibly the first textbook in the area . disputing this claim , mulberger commented that the german psychologist otto lipmann had published a psychological textbook for jurists long before this . the truth may depend on the meaning of the word textbook . lipmann clearly deserves credit for his work , which was a compilation of the lectures he gave to students studying law . lipmann book was specifically intended to educate current and future judges and lawyers , whereas burtt book was intended for both lawyers and students of applied psychology . nevertheless , although burtt book made a valuable contribution to the academic psychological literature , it had little discernible influence on the legal profession or on applied psychology in general . in nineteen thirty five , edward s . robinson published law and the lawyers , which predicted that jurisprudence would become one of the family of social sciences and argued that all of its fundamental concepts must be brought into line with psychological knowledge . the book was lambasted by lawyers and essentially ignored by psychologists . in hindsight , later scholars found robinson ideas much more palatable . it is generally believed that american psychologists have served as expert witnesses since the early nineteen twenties , but , like their european counterparts , they consulted with lawyers and the courts , perhaps particularly the civil courts , before that time . included in this latter category are the juvenile courts , which were a hybrid of the civil and the criminal , dealing with matters of both child protection and delinquency . psychological consultation with juvenile courts was common from their inception in eighteen ninety nine . consultation with and testimony in criminal courts was much less common , as we discuss shortly . according to rogers , the results of experimental research on visual perception were routinely accepted in trademark infringement cases . in cocacola company cherocola company , for example , an experimental psychologist was asked whether the trademarks used by the two companies were so similar as to be likely to cause confusion in the public mind and ultimately deceive the consumer . this was apparently considered a safe undertaking , as the psychologists were not infringing on the territory of the medical experts physicians and psychiatrists who routinely testified on matters of criminal responsibility . as louisell noted , however , because trial court records are generally unavailable and only appellate decisions are published , the testimony of psychologists , particularly in civil cases , may have been less rare than the paucity of documentation would indicate . we do know that psychological testimony was almost inevitably rejected in criminal cases involving the defendant mental state . as a general rule , only medical men that is , persons licensed by law to practice the profession of medicine can testify as experts on the question of insanity ; and the propriety of this general limitation is too patent to permit discussion . the first published case in which an american psychologist qualified as an expert appears to be state driver in nineteen twenty one . the occasion was only a partial victory for forensic psychology , however . a west virginia trial court accepted the chief psychologist of the state bureau of juvenile research as an expert on the matter of juvenile delinquency . however , it rejected his testimony , based on psychological test data , that a twelveyearold alleged victim of an attempted rape was a moron and could not be presumptively believed . in agreeing with the trial court , the west virginia supreme court noted , it is yet to be demonstrated that psychological and medical tests are practical , and will detect the lie on the witness stand . although some commentators interpreted driver as a major loss for psychologists wishing to achieve status as expert witnesses , louisell noted that the decision was not a rejection of psychologists per se , only of the particular evidence offered by one psychologist . nevertheless , it was not until much later , in the nineteen forties and nineteen fifties , that psychologists testified in courts of law on a regular basis , at least in some jurisdictions . they offered opinions and presented data relevant to subjects as diverse as the influence of pretrial publicity on potential witnesses and juries , the effects of pornography on adolescents , the effect of certain educational practices on children , and the likely influence of advertisements on consumers . this is not to say that there was widespread acceptance of the idea that psychologists deserved a niche in the courtroom . resistance to the idea , or at best a cautious approach , consistently characterized much of the legal literature . in the early nineteen forties and the post world war two era , appellate courts also began to hand down rulings that allowed psychologists to offer expert testimony in trial courts on the issue of mental responsibility for criminal and tortious conduct . loh attributed this eventual acceptance to an increase in professionalization , the rapid growth of mental health professions during this period , and the formulation of legal doctrines of insanity consistent with modern psychiatry . one important decision , perhaps the first influential decision , was people hawthorne , a michigan case . hawthorne had been tried for the murder of his wife lover and had pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity . the trial court refused to qualify as an expert witness a professor of psychology from michigan state normal college who had a doctoral degree and an impressive list of credentials . in finding that the trial court had erred in not accepting the psychologist as an expert , the michigan supreme court ruled that the standard for determining expert status was not a medical degree but the extent of the witness knowledge . it advised trial courts to evaluate carefully the merits of a potential witness claim to expertise , noting that a psychologist ability to detect insanity could not be presumed inferior to that of a medical man . the dissenters , however , believed that insanity is a disease and therefore only a person with medical training should qualify as an expert . later in hidden mutual life insurance co . the fourth circuit court of appeals allowed psychological expertise to be applied to a civil case relating to mental status . the plaintiff argued that a disabling nervous condition prevented him from engaging in any gainful occupation and entitled him to disability benefits . a clinical psychologist with a doctoral degree administered a battery of projective tests and testified on his behalf . not only did he report on the test results , but he also gave the opinion that the plaintiff deserved the benefits . when the lawyer for the insurance company objected , the trial judge instructed the jury to disregard the entire opinion testimony on the grounds that the psychologist did not qualify as an expert . the circuit court of appeals ruled that the psychologist should have been qualified as an expert to express his opinion about the plaintiff mental condition . while some psychologists were struggling to be accepted as experts on questions of mental status , competence , and criminal responsibility , others during this era were joining the crucial legal battle against school segregation by testifying and consulting with attorneys in the state cases that would ultimately culminate in the nineteen fifty four landmark ruling brown board of education . david krech and helen trager , social psychologists who had published articles on racial attitude tests , and horace english , an expert on child psychology , were among many who testified for the plaintiffs at some of the school segregation trials . psychologist henry garrett , a former president of the apa , testified on behalf of the state . perhaps the most widely publicized and since then highly critiqued contribution on behalf of the plaintiffs was that of kenneth clark and mamie clark , who conducted the nowfamous doll research to gauge the effects of segregation . kenneth clark then gave social framework testimony reporting the results of this research . when the national association for the advancement of colored people appealed brown and three other segregation cases to the us supreme court , kenneth clark , isidor chein , and stuart w . cook wrote the social science statement that included signatures of thirty two eminent social scientists . this was not , however , the first social science brief to be submitted to an appellate court . according to brigham and grisso , that distinction belongs to the brief submitted to the oregon supreme court in muller oregon . in that case , louis brandeis who later became a prominent justice of the us supreme court argued in support of the state that work hours of women should be limited because social science data demonstrated their inherent weakness . history has not been kind to the scientists in either case . brandeis patriarchal argument in the muller case would be deplored and roundly denounced today , both for its tenor and for its lack of empirical support and rigor . social scientists in the brown case were criticized for their naive methodology , lack of objectivity , and faulty conclusions based on insufficient scientific evidence . in his historiographical inquiry , however , jackson noted that the doll experiments were but one prong of many studies that psychologists and other social scientists referenced in their trial testimony and in the brief submitted to the supreme court . he also argued convincingly that critiques of these social scientists reflected a misreading of their testimony , their research , and their evaluation of relevant evidence . during the same era , psychologists were continuing to make enough inroads testifying on the issue of criminal responsibility that psychiatrists felt the need to protect their turf . in nineteen fifty four , the council of the american psychiatric association , the executive council of the american psychoanalytical association , and the american medical association joined in a resolution stating that only physicians were legitimate experts in the field of mental illness for purposes of courtroom testimony . other individuals could participate only if their testimony was coordinated by medical authority . the resolution greatly influenced trial courts , which became reluctant to accept independent psychological testimony . finally , in jenkins united states , the court of appeals for the district of columbia gave its own direct , although conditional , support to the use of psychologists as experts on the issue of mental illness . although the court was sharply divided , its decision remains the predominant authority for the use of psychologists in the area of criminal responsibility . following that opinion , federal courts and increasingly more state courts certified psychologists as expert witnesses in both criminal and civil cases . during the years in which munsterberg was proselytizing about psychology usefulness in the courtroom , particularly involving expert testimony , another american psychologist was more quietly making inroads into a different forensic area , one specifically related to juvenile courts . as we noted earlier , consultation with these courts was common , but it was chiefly in the area of assessment . in nineteen nine , clinical psychologist grace m . fernald worked with psychiatrist william healy to establish the first clinic designed for youthful offenders , the juvenile psychopathic institute . it was initially developed to serve the newly established juvenile court of chicago by offering diagnoses of problem children . fernald , who received her doctorate from the university of chicago in nineteen seven , was probably the first clinical psychologist to work under the supervision of a psychiatrist as well as one of the earliest psychologists to specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of children and adolescents who appeared before the juvenile courts . the institute , which extended its services rapidly to include treatment and research as well as diagnosis , became a public agency in nineteen fourteen , the institute for juvenile research . arguably , it also provided the earliest formal internships in forensic psychology in the country . fernald and healy used the relatively new stanfordbinet intelligence scale to assess delinquents , but they soon realized the importance of obtaining performance measures as well . this prompted them to develop the healyfernald series of twenty three performance tests , which they began using in nineteen eleven . the two eventually went their separate ways . fernald became a specialist in intellectual disability and intelligence and testing and taught psychology at the university of california los angeles for twenty seven years , until her retirement in nineteen forty eight . healy , along with psychologist augusta bronner , went on to establish the judge baker clinic in boston in nineteen seventeen . during the first third of the twentieth century , most psychologists providing regular services to the courts were psychometrists associated with clinics . the term forensic psychology had not been minted , and legal psychologists were in the halls of academe or consulting sporadically with judges and lawyers . thus , it seems that much of the forensic work of psychologists during this period consisted of cognitive and personality assessments of individuals , both juveniles and adults , who were to come before the courts . the drudgery of daytoday testing made applied psychology unappealing as a profession . often , however , it was where female psychologists were most accepted . in the nineteen thirties , for example , fewer than onethird of all american psychologists were women , but women made up over sixty percent of all applied psychologists . in one of the first published accounts of the work of these early psychometrists . keller described some of the challenges they faced . he noted that in december nineteen sixteen , a psychopathic laboratory was established at the new york city police department for the express purpose of examining persons detained before trial . the staff included psychiatrists , neurologists , social workers , and psychologists , whose task was to conduct hasty pretrial evaluations . according to keller , who was a consulting psychologist at the clinic , detainees arrived for testing at nine a . m . the disadvantage is the lack of time , for all prisoners must be examined in time to get them to court by noon or earlier , and many courts are situated in distant parts of the city . staff members had little time in which to conduct the evaluation and prepare a report that would help the court in its decision making . the work of henry h . goddard during this time must in hindsight be regarded with embarrassment . a student of noted psychologist stanley hall , goddard paved the way for the massive intelligence testing of immigrants and residents of mental institutions , prisons , and juvenile training schools . his followers consulted with the juvenile courts and dutifully administered these tests to the children of the poor who arrived at their door . goddard warning that feebleminded individuals should not be allowed to roam about freely in society because of their innate proclivity toward antisocial behavior contributed significantly to the incarceration of individuals during their reproductive periods and the sterilization of residents in both juvenile and adult facilities . an article in volume one of the american psychologist carried the following job description for a court psychologist . interviews offenders referred by the court to determine the causes of the crime , the attitudes and conflicts , and the educational , vocational , and social background of the client . also may interview parents and guardians . administers and interprets individual intelligence , performance , and personality tests including projective techniques . writes complete case histories including interview information and test interpretations . presents case histories and recommended treatment to colleagues including medical and other officers of the court . may testify in court . qualifications include ma in psychology with a phd preferred , relevant course work , previous experience , and emotional maturity . interestingly , shartle noted that , although few psychologists were employed in such positions , there was indication that employment in the field would increase . however , higher positions in the court were not usually open to psychologists . lindner pinpointed nineteen thirteen as the date when psychological services were first offered in a us correctional facility , specifically a women reformatory in the state of new york . watkins identified the psychologist as eleanor rowland , who was asked to devise a test battery to identify offenders who would benefit from educational programs and be safely returned to society . however , the main function of psychologists employed in some capacity in the state and federal correctional systems during these years was apparently the detection of feeblemindedness among offenders , a condition thought to lead to a life of crime . again , the work of goddard and his followers is relevant . concurrently , however , some psychologists like rowland became involved in a different endeavor : the classification of inmates into various groups for determining where they were to be placed and what services might be provided . the first prison classification system developed by psychologists was apparently instituted in new jersey in nineteen eighteen . new jersey also became the first state to hire a fulltime correctional psychologist . the first state in the united states to provide comprehensive psychological examinations of all admissions to its prison system and applications for parole was wisconsin , in nineteen twenty four . in the late nineteen thirties , darley and berdie surveyed thirteen federal and one hundred and twenty three state prisons and learned that they employed a total of sixty four psychologists who called themselves prison psychologists . although all considered themselves clinical psychologists , only about half had doctorates in psychology . later , raymond corsini expressed concern that there was as yet no history of prison psychology . he estimated that during the nineteen forties , there were approximately two hundred individuals confined in us correctional facilities who were served by a mere eighty psychologists . their work consisted of testing ; providing educational , vocational , and personal guidance ; and maintaining working relationships with all members of the prison staff . in one of the most comprehensive surveys undertaken during the early nineteen forties , questionnaires were sent to four psychologists in an effort to discover the nature of the profession . of the three questionnaires returned in nineteen forty , seventy six men and twenty women indicated they were employed as fulltime psychologists in prisons or correctional institutions . of the three questionnaires returned by the same group in nineteen forty four , fifty three men and twenty seven women said they were employed in prisons or correctional institutions . although these data support corsini estimation that between eighty and one hundred psychologists were employed in the nation correctional facilities during the early to mid nineteen forties , it is interesting to note that , by the mid nineteen forties , approximately onethird of prison psychologists were women . in volume one of the american psychologist , shartle described the work of a prison psychologist . administers intelligence , aptitude , and other tests to either all inmates or certain groups depending on institutional policy . writes an interpretation of test results for the prisoner records . interviews each prisoner to determine background , attitudes , and personality traits for use in guidance , education , possibilities for parole , and placement . results of interview are written and may be submitted in form of case study with test results or other reports . makes recommendations for parole and supplies technical information at staff meetings . gives information in consultation with administrative officers or with specialists in the field of medicine , psychiatry , sociology , education , occupational training , or parole . assists in planning or revising programs for medically sponsored cases including psychiatric and severe physical disability cases . participates in research . investigates problems of penal psychology or test construction and prepares reports of finding . again it was noted that opportunities in the field were limited and the number of openings not numerous . however , several states were planning postwar expansion in buildings and services . psychologists entered the canadian correctional system much later , perhaps as late as the early nineteen fifties . watkins notes that canadian correctional psychology made its first appearance in the literature in nineteen fifty two in a series of newsletters published by the ontario psychological association . the newsletters focused on psychology in the ontario provincial corrections programs and the federal correctional service . the first correctional psychologist in the federal system in canada was employed in nineteen fifty five at st . vincent de paul penitentiary in quebec . correctional psychologists in canada were at first employed primarily to classify inmates for security placement and were usually not a component of the mental health treatment afforded to inmates . in the united states , their role appears to have been broader . since these early days , however , canada in many ways has outpaced american corrections particularly state prison systems both in developing risk assessment instruments and providing rehabilitation services to inmates . classification , however , has always been an important enterprise for psychologists working in correctional settings . reliable offender classification was both an important service to offer to correctional administrators and in many respects a prerequisite to effective treatment . in both the united states and canada , from the twentyd20th century on , psychologists became increasingly involved in developing and testing more sophisticated classification systems . one of the earliest of these modern systems was the jesness classification system . best known , however , was the system proposed by edwin megargee and based on the minnesota multiphasic personality inventory . megargee , using his research on overcontrolled and undercontrolled personalities as a springboard , identified ten inmate types . prison officials then made use of these groupings to assign inmates to custody levels , job assignments , and rehabilitation programs . megargee system is still in use in some prison systems , and clements observed that megargee deserves much credit for providing correctional psychologists with an excellent list of seven criteria for a good classification system . in the nineteen sixties and early nineteen seventies , correctional psychology as a subdiscipline of forensic psychology began to expand . even to this day , though , many if not most psychologists working in corrections prefer to be called correctional psychologists rather than forensic psychologists . this may be because they see their primary function as one of providing services to inmates , not to the legal system . until the nineteen sixties and nineteen seventies , although there were exceptions , psychologists in correctional facilities focused more on classification than on treatment , although important treatment models were proposed by psychologists such as herbert quay and marguerite warren . nevertheless , treatment was not the predominant activity , both because the demand for diagnostic services was great and the obstacles relative to respecting confidentiality and achieving the trust of inmates were difficult to surmount . perhaps even more relevant was the suspicion directed toward psychologists by both administrative and correctional staffs . in an essay reviewing this period in the history of correctional psychology , brodsky cited examples of military psychologists being given punitive assignments or civilian psychologists being obstructed from providing meaningful treatment services to inmates in some cases even reporting for work to find themselves no longer employed , their possessions waiting for them at the prison gate . with the exception of psychologists in the federal bureau of prisons , psychologists working in american prisons reported organizational impediments to conducting meaningful assessments and offering meaningful treatment . in the nineteen sixties , rehabilitation as a correctional goal began to gain favor , and in some but certainly not all prison settings psychologists spent more time working directly with offenders and providing treatment services . although positions were plentiful , the turnover rate was high , primarily because psychologists often had not received adequate preparation for responding to the unique challenges of these environments . one noteworthy innovation that was introduced in federal prisons during this era was the unit management system , which was initially conceptualized by daniel glaser and later promoted by robert levinson . unit management divided prison populations into small groups of prisoners and staff members based on the programming needs of the former and the expertise of the latter . some units those in which more intensive treatment services could be provided became therapeutic communities . other units provided education , training , or work experiences , together with some counseling . although unit management lost support in the united states during the punitive nineteen eighties and nineteen nineties , the concept survives in some state and federal facilities , particularly where substance abuse treatment is provided . many correctional psychologists worked in the trenches during the nineteen sixties and early nineteen seventies and made significant contributions . stanley brodsky was instrumental in launching modern correctional psychology in the united states , but many other individuals made significant contributions as well . canada has its own group of pioneers who have had great impact on correctional philosophy and practice on an international level . they include psychologists paul gendreau , karl hanson , don andrews , and many others whose work is cited in the excellent historical reviews and summaries of watkins and wormith and luong . in the united states , brodsky term as president of the american association for correctional psychology helped provide the impetus to move correctional psychology into a recognized and viable profession . during nineteen seventy two and nineteen seventy three , with brodsky at the helm , the aacp played a key role in setting up a series of conferences on psychology in the criminal justice system , with emphasis on corrections . the proceedings were published in a volume edited by brodsky , psychologists in the criminal justice system . the publication of this influential book could arguably be the official launch date of modern correctional psychology , even though the aacp itself predated brodsky book . brodsky also became the founding editor of the international journal criminal justice and behavior , launched in nineteen seventy four and sponsored by the aacp . brodsky leadership and enthusiasm also helped build one of the earliest doctoral programs specifically designed to prepare clinical psychologists to work in the criminal justice system , particularly corrections , at the university of alabama . in the late nineteen seventies , the apa approved a clinical internship in corrections at the wisconsin department of corrections . today , such programs exist in a variety of colleges and universities , many of which provide internship opportunities for students in state prisons as well as the federal bureau of prisons . those who prefer a narrow definition of forensic psychology do not typically include police psychology in its purview . we have done so because police are sworn to uphold the law and are in many cases the gatekeepers to entry into criminal and juvenile courts , if not civil courts . thus , psychologists who consult with police in numerous capacities are connected with the legal system . it is difficult to pinpoint precisely when police psychology began , primarily because individual psychologists have provided a variety of services to law enforcement without their work being formally recognized . viteles noted that police departments in germany used psychologists in a variety of capacities as early as nineteen nineteen . in the united states , in keeping with the psychometric movement of the early twentieth century , contributions centered around assessment , particularly cognitive assessment administered to candidates for law enforcement positions . four discernible but overlapping historical trends in american police psychology can be identified : cognitive and aptitude screening , personality assessment and the search for the police personality , stress management and other clinical services , and fairness in screening and selection . the first trend nineteen sixteen to nineteen sixty is characterized by attempts of psychologists to assess the intellectual skills required to be an effective police officer . the second trend nineteen fifty two to nineteen seventy five focused on the development of personality measures capable of distinguishing effective from less effective officers . during the second trend , there also were many unsuccessful attempts to identify a police personality . the third trend nineteen seventy four to nineteen ninety four was characterized by psychologists becoming increasingly involved in the identification and treatment of stress and other emotional reactions often experienced by police officers and their loved ones . such topics of interest included the use of excessive force , police decision making , postshooting traumatic reaction , fitness for duty evaluations , and police suicide . the fourth trend nineteen eighty to the present refers to the legal requirements that all persons should have an equal chance of being selected on the basis of individual merit and qualifications . topics during this trend include the americans with disabilities act of nineteen ninety , gender issues in policing , and minority composition, ethnic composition, racial composition of law enforcement agencies . because this chapter focuses on early history , we briefly sketch only the first two trends . it should be noted , however , that police psychologists today are actively involved in consultation with law enforcement and with research in a variety of areas that reflect and transcend the above trends . many belong to professional organizations , such as the apa division eighteen , psychologists in public service and its subgroup police and public safety . lewis terman was the first american psychologist to use mental tests as screening devices in the selection of law enforcement personnel . on october thirty one , nineteen sixteen , at the request of the city manager of san jose , california , he administered an abbreviated form of the stanfordbinet to thirty police and fire department applicants . they ranged in age from twenty one to thirty eight , with a median age of thirty . only four had attended high school , and none had attended beyond the sophomore year . terman found that most of the applicants functioned near the dullnormal range of intelligence ; only three obtained an iq over one hundred , the score considered average for the general population . based on his experience with the intellectual capabilities of schoolage children , terman suggested , somewhat arbitrarily , that applicants with an iq under eighty were not fit for police work or firefighting . the city manager agreed , and ten applicants were immediately excluded from further consideration . a contemporary of terman , psychologist louis thurstone , was also interested in the value of intellectual testing in police screening . thurstone administered the newly developed army intelligence examination to three hundred and fifty eight male members of the detroit police department . the army alpha , developed by robert yerkes , thorndike , and lewis terman and adopted by the us army in nineteen seventeen, was probably the first exclusively american test of intelligence . police officers at all ranks scored below average on the army alpha ; in fact , the more experienced the police officer , the lower was his intelligence score . the average score for the three hundred and seven patrol officers was seventy one ; the sergeants averaged fifty four ; and the seventeen lieutenants , fifty seven . thurstone concluded that law enforcement did not attract intelligent individuals , and the more intelligent individuals who entered police service left for other occupations where their abilities and intelligence were better utilized . law enforcement officers were vindicated somewhat , however , when maude a . merrill administered the army alpha to a group of already employed officers and applicants . they scored at the average level . the differences between her findings and those of terman and thurstone were probably due to department leadership factors , recruitment procedures , and selection ratios . intelligence testing continued throughout much of the middle part of the twentieth century and may still exist in some departments today . however , questions about the validity of such assessment and understandable resistance from police unions persuaded most agencies to turn to a different form of assessment , the personality assessment . in the years between the two world wars , psychologists gradually became more involved in the screening of law enforcement personnel and began to incorporate personality assessment into that enterprise . wilmington , delaware , and toledo , ohio , appear to share the distinction of being the first two cities to require ongoing psychological screening for use in police selection , in the form of mental and personality tests . the year was nineteen thirty eight . thus , personality tests came on the scene at about this time . it was not until the late nineteen fifties and nineteen sixties , though , that personality assessment overtook cognitive tests in the screening of law enforcement personnel . while the aforementioned psychologists were among the first to study the cognitive capacities of police officers and candidates , there is no indication that they consistently participated in the screening and selection of law enforcement personnel . at this point , we have no information about who might have been the first psychologist to assume this regular role . as late as nineteen thirty nine , donald paterson could identify only one psychologist , Rourke who had actively investigated the validity of the nation civil service examination system , even though routine competitive exams were administered as far back as eighteen eighty three . during the late nineteen forties and the nineteen fifties , psychologists continued to consult with police departments . the psychological screening processes initiated by the wilmington and toledo police departments was adopted by other cities ; jacksonville in nineteen forty seven , berkeley in nineteen forty nine , oakland in nineteen fifty , new orleans in nineteen fifty two , and pasadena , philadelphia , milwaukee , and cleveland in nineteen fifty three . in june nineteen fifty two , the los angeles police department began to administer a battery of psychological tests . the nineteen fifty seven rankin article was the first to appear in the literature attesting to any ongoing program of psychological assessment for police applicants . during the late nineteen sixties , personality assessment , psychological screening , and police psychology in general received an immense boost when the president commission on law enforcement and the administration of justice strongly recommended widespread use of psychological measures to determine the emotional stability of all officer candidates . this recommendation was followed by the strong endorsement in nineteen sixty eight by the national advisory commission on civil disorder that psychological screening would improve the emotional quality of individuals entering law enforcement . in keeping with commission recommendations , congress provided law enforcement assistance administration funds for law enforcement agencies to retain the services of mental health professionals . in nineteen seventy three , the police task force report of the national commission on criminal justice standards and goals encouraged the establishment of a behavioral sciences unit or consultant for all law enforcement agencies . even before then , though , psychologists were offering services to law enforcement on an asneeded basis , consulting in such areas as stress management , crisis management with the mentally disordered , and domestic violence . according to nietzel , the first project to train police in crisis intervention techniques in domestic disputes was developed in the late nineteen sixties by morton bard , consulting with the new york city police department . at about the same time , in december nineteen sixty eight , martin reiser was hired by the los angeles police department as a fulltime police psychologist . the evidence to date indicates that reiser was the first fulltime psychologist whose responsibilities were strictly police related . reiser himself is not entirely certain he was the first fulltime police psychologist in the country . in nineteen sixty nine , he presented a paper at the western psychological association convention in vancouver entitled the police department psychologist . this presentation may represent the official launch of contemporary north american police psychology . the paper was published in nineteen seventy two . reiser continued to be the most prolific writer on police psychology during the early nineteen seventies . in nineteen seventy two , in cooperation with the california school of professional psychology and the los angeles police department , he helped establish what is believed to be the first clinical internship in police psychology in the united states . by nineteen seventy seven , at least six other law enforcement agencies employed fulltime psychologists . in the early years of the twentieth century , psychologists began to offer psychological perspectives on criminal behavior and to speculate about the causes of crime . like the police psychology discussed earlier , criminal psychology typically is not considered in the narrow definitions of forensic psychology , primarily because it appears more theoretical than clinical in nature . however , in its youth , criminal psychology was essentially clinical in nature , as the theories often centered on the measurable mental capacities of offenders . furthermore , forensic psychology devoid of a theoretical base such as that provided by criminal psychology is difficult to justify and support . psychologists like goddard had repeatedly found that most juvenile and adult offenders were mentally deficient , which led to the conclusion that a primary cause of crime and delinquency was intellectual limitation . in large part , this belief reflected the pervasive influence of darwinism , which contended that humans differ only in degree from their animal brethren . the mentally deficient were considered both intellectually and morally less capable of adapting to modern society . they presumably resorted to more primitive ways of meeting their needs , such as crime . these unfortunate conclusions , which did not take into account social conditions , cultural differences , or socialization processes , lent support to unconscionable practices such as lengthy incarceration of the disadvantaged , confused , and powerless . in the history of psychology , few scholars have ventured to offer comprehensive theories on crime or delinquent behavior . those who have have often been strongly influenced by darwinian thinking . therefore , theoretical orientations focusing on mental deficiency or biological and constitutional dispositions dominated early psychological criminology . in the early nineteen sixties , a psychological criminology distinct from psychiatric and more extensive than psychometrics began to show signs of life . hans toch , who was also making significant contributions to correctional psychology , edited one of the first books on psychological criminology , legal and criminal psychology . some may argue that hans gross published the first criminal psychology book in eighteen ninety seven , the same year in which he was appointed professor in ordinary for criminal law and justice administration at the university of czernowitz in austria . one writer has asserted that gross was the originator of the discipline of criminal psychology . however , gross was a lawyer by training , in practice , and in spirit and eventually became a successful judge . his book details his observations of offenders , witnesses , jurors , and judges but relies very little on psychological research . this is not surprising , of course , because psychology in eighteen ninety seven was far from being an integrated discipline with a rich body of knowledge . nevertheless , it is significant that toch book , published more than sixty years later , represents the earliest attempt to integrate , in an interdisciplinary fashion , the empirical research of psychologists relevant to criminal behavior and legal issues . british psychologist hans eysenck , in crime and personality , formulated the first comprehensive theoretical statement on criminal behavior advanced by a psychologist . eysenck theory focused on the personality characteristics of extraversion and introversion , which he believed could be attributed to both a biological predisposition to seek or avoid sensation and the learning experiences obtained in one social environment . although eysenck theory was circulated and tested extensively in the late nineteen sixties and nineteen seventies , it has been shifted aside today , replaced by popular developmental approaches . shortly after eysenck proposed his theory , edwin megargee put forth his own heuristic statements regarding undercontrolled and overcontrolled personalities and their relationships to violence , a theory that then served as a basis for his classification system referred to earlier . toch followed with violent men . the relationship between aggression and violence was studied seriously under the leadership of leonard berkowitz , albert bandura and later robert baron . following psychiatrist hervey cleckley groundbreaking work on psychopaths , they became subjects of vigorous theory building and research in the hands of canadian psychologist robert hare and others . psychopathy continues to be a rich research area on the etiology of criminal behavior to this day . since the nineteen seventies , we have witnessed a literature and research explosion in all areas of forensic psychology . some thirty years ago , loh observed that forensic psychology had come of age . most recently , heilbrun and brooks noted that he field has matured : the recognition of the importance of the foundational science is stronger , and we are closer to identifying best practices across a range of legal contexts that are addressed by forensic psychology research and practice . in nineteen sixty five , just over one hundred englishlanguage articles and books related to forensic psychology had been published . by the mid nineteen seventies , the numbers were well into the thousands . professional journals exclusively devoted to forensic psychological research and issues were beginning to emerge in north america . criminal justice and behavior led the way in nineteen seventy four , followed by law and psychology review beginning in nineteen seventy five , law and human behavior in nineteen seventy seven , behavioral sciences and the law in nineteen eighty two , and psychology , public policy , and law in nineteen ninety five . great britain followed suit with criminal behavior and mental health , psychology , crime , and law , the british psychological society legal and criminological psychology , and the journal of forensic psychology practice . in addition to these , other interdisciplinary scholarly and scientific journals relevant to forensic psychology have emerged in recent years . during the nineteen seventies , interdisciplinary and specialized training in forensic psychology was introduced at the doctoral , master , internship , postdoctoral and continuing education levels . the first interdisciplinary , successful psychology and law program was developed by bruce sales at the university of Nebraska lincoln in nineteen seventy four . other universities soon followed in this endeavor , some more successfully than others . in the late twentieth century and into twenty first , thoughtful articles addressing the content of education and training programs in forensic psychology have been published . another indication of the growth in forensic psychology is professional certification of practitioners in the field , a development that began in the late nineteen seventies . beginning in nineteen seventy eight , board certification in forensic psychology was provided by the american board of forensic psychology . in recent years , other board certifications have emerged , such as the american board of forensic examiners . in two thousand and one , as noted earlier , the apa voted to recognize forensic psychology as a specialty , and specialty guidelines for forensic psychologists and psychology were adopted in nineteen ninety one and two thousand and eleven , respectively . forensic psychology has seen a rapid expansion in other parts of the globe besides north america , particularly in europe and australia . blackburn , in the first issue of legal and criminological psychology , asserted , the growth in the number of forensic psychologists has been among the most prominent developments in the burgeoning application of psychology to law during the last two decades . he noted that , although the growth was most apparent in the united states , there was a parallel growth throughout europe in the latter part of the twentieth century . after an uncertain beginning and some stagnation between the two world wars , forensic psychology is now well established . despite some continuing concerns about its definition , it is importantly clinical in nature but also critically dependent on theory and research . all indicators suggest that forensic psychology has an extremely promising future as we continue into the twenty first century . in the following chapters , other contributors assess forensic psychology current status and the promise it holds for a future generation of researchers , practicing psychologists , theorists and legal practitioners .